# By the Sweat of Your Brow

An Intellectual History of Work from the Greeks to Sen and Nussbaum

__________

This book offers a concise overview of the intellectual history of work in the
Western context. While Western philosophy has for a long time been interested
in the liberative aspects of politics, including justice, liberty or equality.
and its canon includes major works on the culture of play, work seems to have been
left out from its primary focus. This is the more astonishing as since the
middle of the 19th century the world of work seems to be in the centre of
political fight and social conflict. This volume aims to fill this gap, by
providing the first concise, yet substantial account of the intellectual
history of work, a collection of essays about the relevant ideas on work by
major Western philosophers.

The book’s chapters follow in a chronological order the major developments and
some of the crucial authors of the history of European philosophy. The
internationally diverse group of our contributors will give concise accounts of
their primary research material on their chosen single thinker or movement or
school of thought. This will make the work interesting for those who are
researching on these authors beyond their views on work, as well.

While the book aims to sum up two and a half thousand years of Western thought,
the selection of its authors will have a spatio-temporal focus. It will
concentrate on those periods (basically 19th-20th century) and area (Northern
and Western Europe, as well as the US) where social movements were first and
most vehemently initiated on a large scale to better the working conditions of
the everyday labourer, and in particular those of the physical workers,
including children and women. It was in this context that reflections on work
were more frequent among influential philosophers. We paid special attention to
represent the plurality of political views from Marx to the social teachings of
the church, and also of the new generation of female philosophers from the
early twentieth century (Edith Stein, Hannah Arendt) to our time (Martha
Nussbaum). We also wanted to show that theorist and historians of capitalism
(Adam Smith or Max Weber) can easily find their place beside critics of
capitalism, including the social teaching of the church or new natural law
theory. On the advice of our reviewer, we are happy to include a chapter on
Veblen, and another one on a recent author, to bring our story up-to-date, on
Martha Nussbaum’s cooperation with Amartya Sen on the capability approach.

