# Conquering Nature by Work: Francis Bacon on the Technological Ends of Natural Science

Tyler Chamberlain (Trinity Western University)

Francis Bacon is associated with a move towards practical philosophy,
repudiating what he took to be the ancients' lack of concern for public
utility. He conceived of natural philosophy as a practice oriented towards the
task of mastering nature by directing its energies and tendencies towards ends
chosen by human beings. Baconian natural philosophy (hereafter natural science)
was thus a technological pursuit, laying the moral and epistemological
foundations for the proliferation of labor-saving and pain-reducing devices.
This chapter will elaborate on the following points in the context of a
philosophical reflection on the meaning and role of work in human affairs.

First: Natural science is a form of work, with standardized methods, expected
results, and requisite modes of social organization. "We," he writes, "conquer
nature by work" (Great Instauration).

Second: The purpose of natural science is to alleviate the toil and suffering
associated with nature's resistance to human concerns – that is, to reduce the
amount of effort (or work) required to meet human needs. Bacon's Great
Instauration speaks of increasing man's right over nature "so that (despite our
humanity and subjection to death) the understanding may be raised and enlarged
in its ability to overcome the difficult and dark things of nature." Somewhat
paradoxically, we could say that the work of natural science is to alleviate
the burden of work.

Third: Bacon explicitly conceived of the work of natural science as a remedy
for the Fall of Man as described in Genesis 3. Part of the curse, as Bacon
understands it, is that Man lost his kingdom, or dominion, over creation.
Science, understood as a technological activity, restores Man's kingdom over
the natural world. Bacon thus ends The New Organon with these words: "man, by
manifold labours…compels the creation, in time and in part, to provide him with
bread, that is to serve the purposes of human life" (II.LII). It is by pursuing
the work of natural science that the burden and toil previously associated with
work can be reduced, thus restoring mankind's rightful mastery and authority
over the natural world."
