# Work in The New Testament

[James Alexander](../bios/alexander.md), Bilkent University


The New Testament of the Bible launched into the Western world an entirely new
concept of 'work': it was no longer the arduous thing that the Hellenic
philosophers had wanted to avoid, nor was it merely the Hebraic God's creative
act or the Jewish observance of the law: it was now God's saving act. God's
work made man's work of only secondary significance. Everyone is familiar with
the Pauline and Lutheran doctrine of a distinction between 'justification by
faith' and 'justification by works'. But no such distinction is possible when
we consider the full range of meanings of work in the New Testament. There are
many words for 'work' in the New Testament: not only ergon, work in the sense
of effective act, but also kopos, work in the sense of burdensome act, and
ponos, work in the sense of painful act; and not only these still relatively
straightforward terms, but also the related and importantly contrasted words
praxis and poiesis (the origins of our words for 'practice' and 'poetry') and
words for specific and significant works: healings, miracles, signs, even
resurrection. Work is no simple category in the Bible, and cannot be: because
there is a continual leaping over of the levels from earthly to heavenly.
Therefore, the New Testament contains much matter about ordinary work, in the
sense of toil, but also discusses the messianic and apostolic work of healing
and preaching, and, finally, it recognises the work of God the Father in the
crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus. By 'faith' the Christian tradition did
not disparage work: on the contrary, it asked Christians to trust in work, the
work of God.
