# Tocqueville, Americans, and Honorable Work

Jacob Wolf, Regent University

To people outside the United States, Americans are virtually synonymous with
work and with labor. To ascertain the identity of someone in America, one
tends to ask, "What do you do for a living?"  There is a deeply rooted—one
could say material or political—connection between Americans and their work.
Alexis de Tocqueville perceived just this connection in 1831, during his
9-month journey throughout the United States.
Unlike Max Weber, who thought that Americans understood their passion for
labor, or industry, as evidence of having received divine saving grace,
Tocqueville saw Americans' predilection for labor as a
by-product of the equality of conditions--that is to say, of democracy itself.
Because there is no landed aristocracy or primogeniture in America, all people
start off roughly equal; no matter his heritage, one must labor of necessity.
Labor is therefore both the great equalizer and the means of distinguishing
oneself, for labor is profoundly connected to an individual's hopes and
anxieties—hopes of one day ascending the socioeconomic ladder through
individual effort and anxieties that one could, at any moment, fall back down
the ladder. This causes the American to throw himself into labor with a fervor
or restiveness all but unknown in pre-democratic ages. Whereas aristocratic
societies declare human necessities, like work and wages, to be vulgar,
democratic societies declare the very same to be "honorable" or praiseworthy.
As Tocqueville notes, democracies tend to sanctify the notion of labor,
considering it "an honorable necessity of the human condition." This honor
given labor leads to good and bad consequences: it allows Americans to achieve
material well-being but it also enables the love of material well-being
("materialism"), an exclusive passion of the human heart which threatens even
the productive nature of labor. The American love of work, Tocqueville notes,
built an entire nation in short order; however, that very love of work can also
lead to materialism, which he sees as the primary threat to democratic nations.
To ensure continued national flourishing, Tocqueville counsels Americans to
continue loving work, without somehow loving exclusively the material objects
one can obtain through that work—a paradox of the highest order.

