# Hannah Arendt on the Triumph of *homo faber* and the Fragility of Human Action

Josefina Araos Bralic and Sarah J. Wilford

Contribution to volume *By the Sweat of Your Brow: Some Concepts of Work
in the History of Western Thought* \[working title\] edited by Gene
Callahan.

**Josefina Araos Bralic**

Josefina Araos Bralic is a researcher at the Instituto de Estudios de la
Sociedad (IES) in Santiago, Chile. She earned her Bachelor\'s and
Master\'s degrees in History from Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile. Currently, she is pursuing a PhD in Philosophy at Universidad de
los Andes (Chile). Her research focuses on populism, the crisis of
liberal democracies, and the political philosophy of Hannah Arendt.

**Sarah J. Wilford**

Sarah J. Wilford is a Professor and Researcher at Centro Signos,
Universidad de los Andes in Santiago, Chile. She received her PhD in
Politics from King\'s College London. She studies the political thought
of Alexis de Tocqueville, especially regarding family, women, and the
maintenance of liberty in democratic societies.

Word count: 5,133 (excluding footnotes and bibliography)

Rebel, refugee, and political thinker, Hannah Arendt (1906-1975) is
renowned for grappling with grave themes. She attempted to make sense of
the horrors of the twentieth century and to understand the human
experience in the context of modernity. Because she centered this
exposition on how we approach work and activity, rather than our traits
and dispositions, her schema for understanding what it means to be human
is especially relevant to the aims of this volume. Arendt's framework
for thinking about something typically considered quotidian---the human
experience of work---has been impactful, generating attention in fields
as diverse as sociology, occupational science, and management
studies.[^1] These days, scholars and pundits look to Arendt to reckon
with various socio-political ills, such as "the decline of liberal
democracy, the spread of fake news, the rise of the social sphere, the
triumph of technology, the loss of the private realm and the experience
of mass loneliness."[^2] Her work is not above reproach, however, as
feminists and democratic theorists alike have criticized aspects of her
oeuvre.[^3]

Posited in her treatise *The Human Condition* (1958), her distinctions
between labor, work, and action offer a typology of the human effort we
call work. This chapter provides an overview of Arendt's categories of
labor, work, and action, which together comprise the *vita activa*,
before focusing on the category of work and its relationship to the
possibility of human action in a free society. Though on the surface
these themes appear separate from her philosophical attention to themes
like totalitarianism and evil, Arendt's conception of the *vita activa*
was profoundly political and therefore was germane to, not just
understanding quotidian life, but all social and political life. Given
the political implications of Arendt's argument about action and
political life, this chapter necessarily explores the maintenance of
freedom and the fragility of action in our modern era. Lastly, this
chapter concludes by connecting the themes surfaced in Arendt's
exploration of the *vita activa* to some of the other themes of her
broader work, like totalitarianism, evil, and revolution.

Born to Jewish secular parents, Arendt seemed suited to philosophy from
a young age.[^4] She reflected that as a teenager she knew what
philosophy meant to her, stating "I can either study philosophy or I can
drown myself."[^5] At university, Arendt studied with Martin Heidegger
and Karl Jaspers.[^6] In 1929, she left Heidelberg for Berlin, and she
soon found herself amid the burgeoning uncertainty of 1930s Berlin.[^7]
In 1933, her husband, the communist-leaning Günther Anders, moved to
Paris.[^8] Soon, she was arrested, and she too escaped to Paris.[^9]
Arendt and Anders grew apart, and in Paris, Arendt met her second
husband Heinrich Blücher.[^10] Before finally fleeing to the United
States in 1941, Arendt was detained in an internment camp in the south
of France.[^11] In the United States, she established herself as an
academic, writer, and thinker, producing her great philosophical works
and making sense of the horrors she and so many had witnessed in
previous decades.

**The *Vita Activa*: Labor, Work, and Action**

Arendt's conception of the *vita activa* is comprised of "three
fundamental human activities: labor, work and action."[^12] As Paul
Voice says, these "represent Arendt's account of what it means to be
human."[^13] Arendt describes the rise and fall of the "the term *vita
activa*," considering that with the decline "of the ancient city-state,"
this idea of the active life lost "political meaning."[^14] She says
this is because over time "action" was deemed essential to "earthly
life" much like labor and work, and this meant "contemplation" and "the
*vita contemplativa*" rose in prominence "as the only truly free way of
life."[^15] Arendt traces the idea of the eminence of contemplation over
activity to antiquity, and she links the value placed by the ancients on
freedom "from political activity" to the value placed by Christian
thinkers on freedom "from entanglement in worldly affairs."[^16] The
Christian perspective liberalized this aspiration as not only for elite
contemplatives, but as "a right for all."[^17]

Arendt establishes what she terms the "traditional" understanding of the
*vita activa.*[^18] According to Arendt, the *vita activa* has long held
a "negative connotation of 'un-quiet,'" and this relates to the idea
that the preference for "contemplation over activity" originates in the
belief that "no work of human hands can equal in beauty and truth the
physical *kosmos.*"[^19] Mere production to meet needs pales in
comparison to higher contemplation. Thus, conventionally, *vita activa*
is defined with reference to "*vita contemplativa*" because active life
merely "serves the needs" of the contemplative life.[^20] It is
secondary and lower.

Arendt proposes to understand the *vita activa* differently.[^21] She
believes this revision is needed because the "weight of contemplation in
the traditional hierarchy has blurred the distinctions and articulations
within the *vita activa* itself," which she aims to recover.[^22] She
contends that even major modern philosophical shifts, brought by the
likes of Marx and Nietzsche, did not upend this traditional
understanding of the active life.[^23] Arendt positions her account as
different from both traditional and modern assumptions by suggesting
that "the concern" underpinning the "activities" of the *vita activa*
"is not the same as and is neither superior nor inferior to the central
concern of the *vita contemplativa.*"[^24]

Having established Arendt's hope to rehabilitate the reputation of the
*vita activa*, we now turn to those distinctions between the three
principal facets of the *vita activa* that she recovers. First, Arendt
explores labor. The material matters of "life itself," like "growth,
metabolism, and eventual decay," define labor.[^25] For Arendt, "labor
is the activity which corresponds to the biological process of the human
body;" labor serves the "vital necessities" of the body.[^26] The
activity of labor can be identified by the absence of evidence: "its
effort is almost as quickly consumed as the effort is spent."[^27]
Though there appears a degree of "futility" in these efforts, there is
also "great urgency," given "life itself" relies on this activity.[^28]
Because the "least durable of tangible things," consumed rapidly,
support life, labor curiously contains both "the least worldly" and "the
most natural of all things."[^29] Though labor produces that which is
"man-made," these objects are not lasting, but rather exist within
nature's "cyclical movement."[^30]

Next, work proves more complex. Work denotes "the activity" that exists
outside the "ever-recurring life cycle."[^31] Work produces "an
'artificial' world of things," distinguished from the natural world, and
while life inhabits this "artificial world," nevertheless, "this world
itself is meant to outlast and transcend" life.[^32] Where labor held
both worldly and unworldly features, work corresponds to
"worldliness."[^33] Arendt differentiates between "\[t\]he work of our
hands" and "the labor of our bodies," and she holds that work creates
the "things whose sum total constitutes the human artifice."[^34] These
"things" are "objects for use," but unlike that which is produced by
labor, "\[t\]heir proper use does not cause them to disappear."[^35]
Rather, they provide for the "stability and solidity" that protects and
contains humankind, while their "durability" endows them with a quality
of objective separateness from our "voracious needs and wants."[^36]

Here, Arendt introduces her idea of the *homo faber*, the making man. He
is "the creator of the human artifice" and "a destroyer of nature"
because work and "fabrication" always involve detaching resources from a
"natural location" through "violation and violence."[^37] The *homo
faber* is distinct from *animal laborans*, and where *animal laborans*
is dependent, *homo faber* is "lord and master of the whole earth."[^38]
The process of work, including the "violence" that extracts "the
material torn out of nature" and the "solidity" that follows, entails a
superior type of "human strength" that is unlike the "pleasure or
exhaustion in earning one's bread" or "in sheer labor."[^39] Further,
because all "work of fabrication is performed under the guidance of a
model," work contains a quality of "infinite" production and
reproduction because this model has been and can always be
referenced.[^40] Arendt reminds readers that the "potential
multiplication," intrinsic to the category of work, is distinct from the
cyclical "repetition" of the category of labor because it "multiplies
something" with "a relatively stable, relatively permanent existence in
the world," rather than repeats according to natural processes.[^41] The
ends of the work of *homo faber* are indisputable: the end is evident
"when an entirely new thing with enough durability to remain in the
world as an independent entity has been added to the human
artifice."[^42] Work possess "a definite beginning and a definite,
predictable end."[^43] This makes it different from labor, which serves
"the cyclical movement of the body's life process" and "has neither a
beginning nor an end," and different from action, which is has "a
definite beginning" but not a "a predictable end."[^44]

Lastly, Arendt defines action, and this definition receives perhaps the
most scholarly attention, from tracing the origins of her understanding
of action to defending her perspective on action.[^45] For Arendt,
action operates "directly between men without the intermediary of things
or matter," and it relates to "plurality," i.e., the reality that *we*,
in the plural, live together "and inhabit the world."[^46] She notes
that "this plurality" underpins "all political life."[^47] Arendt
explains that "\[p\]lurality is the condition of human action because we
are all the same, that is, human, in such a way that nobody is ever the
same as anyone else."[^48]

Though all activities relate to "natality and morality," Arendt connects
action with the concept of "natality" in an important way.[^49] There is
a "new beginning inherent in birth" that impacts the environment solely
"because the newcomer possesses the capacity of beginning something
anew, that is, of acting."[^50] For Arendt, "natality" has a quality of
"initiative," and she suggests that because action is closely related to
"political activity" then "natality," too, is an important element of
politics.[^51] Action is a political activity that features both
plurality and natality.

Arendt argues that "\[s\]peech and action" allow us to show ourselves to
each other "*qua* men," not as "objects" but as people, beyond "mere
bodily existence."[^52] This way we show ourselves to each other and
"distinguish" ourselves "rests on initiative," and it defines us
relationally, as humans.[^53] To exist "without speech and without
action" is to exist without fellows, and, therefore, it is a "dead,"
unhuman life.[^54] Action is committed by "word and deed" in order to
make ourselves part of "the human world," and the effort to "insert
into" or to "join" the world resembles "birth."[^55] This is based on
"initiative," rather than "necessity, like labor" or "utility, like
work."[^56] Action is also distinguished from labor and work because it
contains a quality of "the unexpected" and "improbable."[^57] Where
labor follows predictable natural needs and work follows a model, action
instead possess the potential for originality and spontaneity. Further,
action cannot be undertaken "in isolation," given its social,
relational, and revelatory nature.[^58] Action does not require a model,
as in work and fabrication, but it does require others. Action, thus,
for Arendt, is the most human part of the *vita activa*.[^59]

Paul Voice summarizes that according to Arendt "an action can be
described as a moment of origination that discloses the individual actor
within a plurality of others who constitute an audience and who are
bound to the actor by a common world."[^60] In practice, this means that
"authentic political action is speech," not in a "formal" sense, but in
a deliberative and relational sense.[^61] This leads Arendt to favor a
form of politics that prizes "free deliberation, discussion, and
dispute."[^62] Thus, within this category of action, we arrive at forms
of participatory and deliberative politics based on the human disclosure
born of initiative.

The activities of the active life each relate to freedom in distinctive
ways.[^63] In particular, according to Arendt, freedom is action, and,
as noted, action makes us human; this marries freedom to what it means
to be human, or indeed "the purpose of life."[^64] This is more obvious
in contradistinction to the other categories: action avoids "the
necessitations of labour as well as the necessitations of means-end
thinking that constitutes the instrumentality of work," as Voice
explains.[^65] The liberty inherent in action delivers us the
opportunity to overcome "the limitations of our embodied selves and the
mechanical thinking of instrumentality."[^66] Labor is activity oriented
to making the consumable, necessary things. Work is activity oriented to
making the permanent, useful things. Differentiated from the "necessity
of labor and the utility of work," action is activity oriented towards
something beyond these things.[^67] As noted above, Arendt saw these
"three activities" of the *vita activa* as related to "natality and
mortality:"[^68] labor protects our "survival," while work allows for
some "permanence and durability" amid the "futility" and ephemera of
existence.[^69] For its part, because action establishes "political
bodies," action establishes memory and "history."[^70] The efforts of
the active life are based in "natality" because they "provide and
preserve the world for, to foresee and reckon with, the constant influx
of newcomers who are born into the world as strangers."[^71] The efforts
of the *vita activa* emerge as most clear and purposeful with "the
culminating experience of free action."[^72] This is why action is
pre-eminent with Arendt's account, and it is these types of
"distinctions and articulations within the *vita activa* itself" that
she wishes to recover by rehabilitating the reputation of the *vita
activa* as a whole.[^73] Her account prizes action over other activities
of human effort, countering both the perspective that prioritizes the
*vita contemplativa* and the perspective that undervalues action (and
thereby, politics).[^74]

**The *homo faber*, the Fragility of Action, and Modernity**

With Arendt's typology of human activity in mind, we now turn to work,
specifically, and the triumph of the *homo faber* in the modern era. To
understand the prominence of *homo faber* and how his pre-eminence
affects action and the maintenance of freedom, it is useful to examine
*homo faber* and his activity, work, more closely. For Arendt, *homo
faber* is truly individualistic, "a lord and master," because he is
neither subject to the whims and cycles of nature, like a laboring
animal, nor subject to the interdependence of human fellowship, like
"the man of action."[^75] Solitary, he is able "to produce" and "to
destroy."[^76]

*Homo faber* makes tools.[^77] The tools of *homo faber* "are dictated
by such 'objective' aims as he may wish to invent, rather than by
subjective needs and wants."[^78] These "aims" relate to the
"fundamental experience of instrumentality" that defines the work of the
*homo faber*, which allows for the axiom "that the end justifies the
means."[^79] For example, "the wood justifies killing the tree and the
table justifies destroying the wood."[^80] Arendt explains that this
instrumentality implies that "end product organizes the work process
itself" because all elements of the work are considered only "in terms
of suitability and usefulness for the desired end."[^81] The product is
judged along similar lines to the process, and Arendt thinks that this
yields an infinite "chain" of "utility" and instrumentalization.[^82]
Arendt notes "all ends" can become "means" in a new context.[^83] This
worries Arendt. She predicts that amid the "instrumentality which rules
over the whole world of use objects and utility," true "meaning" is
lost.[^84] All ends eventually become "an object among objects" in *homo
faber*'s "arsenal" of tools for work.[^85] Though the ends of work are
not consumed or fleeting, as in the case of labor, they nevertheless
possess qualities that fade, as they yield to infinite
instrumentalization. For Arendt, "\[m\]eaning" is "permanent,"
suggesting that *homo faber* is detached from meaning.[^86] *Homo
faber*, the "fabricator" preoccupied with "means and ends," cannot
comprehend "meaning," just as "the *animal laborans*" cannot comprehend
"instrumentality."[^87]

Arendt suggests that in order to escape this "meaninglessness" found in
"strictly utilitarian philosophy,"--derived from *homo faber*'s
experience of reality--we may dismiss "the objective world of use things
and fall back upon the subjectivity of use itself."[^88] She means that
"man himself" can exist as "the ultimate end" that severs the limitless
"chain of ends and means" and endows "utility" with some "dignity."[^89]
Unfortunately, Arendt is pessimistic. As soon as *homo faber* makes
himself "the highest end," both his useful objects and "nature"
transform into valueless "means."[^90] This does not resolve the
meaningless of the instrumental "chain." *Homo faber* "instrumentalizes"
and this "instrumentalization" reduces "all things into means,"
instigating "their loss of intrinsic and independent value."[^91]

Arendt explains that what matters in her investigation of work and *homo
faber* is not "instrumentality" as such, but instead "the generalization
of the fabrication experience in which usefulness and utility are
established as the ultimate standards for life and the world of
men."[^92] Instrumentalization is not terrible per se, but it is
worrying if instrumentalization consumes all efforts and activities of
human society.

As noted, Arendt describes the superiority of action. Her description,
however, does not imply that action is prioritized as it ought to be in
modern society. Instead, she accounts for the triumph of *homo faber*
and work in modern society. To explain this process, she notes the
temptation of instrumentalization, but she also admits to the fragility
inherent in action that makes it an arduous undertaking. Action, for
Arendt, entails some daunting features: suffering, boundlessness, and
unpredictability. The inherent sociability of action means all action
intersects with and reacts to others; "the actor always moves among and
in relation to other acting beings."[^93] The acting person is at once
"doer" and "sufferer."[^94] Action, too, instigates a limitless "chain,"
like work, but it is not a chain of meaninglessness.[^95] Reaction is
never solely responsive or automatic because "action acts upon" free
actors, every "reaction" constitutes "a new action that strikes out on
its own and affects others."[^96] Thus, action is highly networked. The
efforts and effects of "action and reaction" are not "confined to two
partners;" in fact, the "boundlessness" of action means "the smallest
act" can instigate wide change.[^97]

In this context, Arendt notes that the "limiting and protecting
principles" of our "human institutions," e.g., "territorial boundaries"
and "laws," are fragile and essential precisely because they do not
exist organically.[^98] The drama of action's "boundlessness" coexists
with its primary purpose, the "capacity for establishing relationships,"
and Arendt highlights the importance of "moderation, of keeping within
bounds" as "one of the political virtues par excellence."[^99] We can
moderate action in political life, using "various limitations and
boundaries," but these limits are futile in the face of action's
"inherent unpredictability."[^100]

The unpredictability of action is made especially obvious in light of
Arendt's observation that "the light that illuminates processes of
action, and therefore all historical processes, appears only at their
end, frequently when all the participants are dead."[^101] It is the
"historian" and "storyteller" who evaluate the "product" of action, and
this critical distance is quite unlike the proximate and immediate
judgment of "the craftsman's eye."[^102] *Homo faber* is much closer to
the product of his efforts than the man of action. The temptations and
satisfactions of instrumentalization appear even more alluring
considering the dramatic, unwieldly, and unknowable features that
constitute action. For Arendt, the demands of action may mean we are at
risk of inverting the proper hierarchy of the active life.

This inversion, in turn, has serious consequences. Not only a turn away
from politics, but a turn towards individualism. Recall the isolation of
*homo faber*. Arendt sees our era as defined by "alienation and
loneliness," as Dana Villa writes.[^103] Without "a stable and vibrant
public realm" and sociability, the critical faculties of "the modern
individual" weaken, and this isolation and detachment leaves "the modern
individual" disposed to "an ideology" with seeming explanatory power and
even to "totalitarian fictions."[^104] This is described in her work on
totalitarianism: the submission of the masses to totalitarian ideology
parallels the collapse of a shared morality received from traditional
modes of authority. Arendt worries that in the modern era, we are happy
to forgo action and thereby relinquish political liberty and
participation; perhaps, we are less inconvenienced, but we are also less
free, less human.[^105] Importantly, though we associate Arendt with
analysis of totalitarianism, and totalitarianism is the most extreme
manifestation of this inclination, she saw this trend in other contexts,
such as "liberal democratic societies," like the United States, and
Europe's "bureaucratic welfare states."[^106] Villa summarizes the
evasion of action in both settings, according to Arendt's logic: "If the
majority of people in a particular polity thought of freedom as
essentially the freedom from politics (as in America) or politics as the
centralized administration of the needs of life (as in the European
welfare state), then the public realm and its distinctive freedom were
bound to be in jeopardy."[^107] Though many moderns live in democracies,
these democracies do not feature the action and participation that
Arendt admires in her analysis of the active life.

Some scholars emphasize Arendt's interest in participatory democracy as
her hope for the preservation of action and the maintenance of freedom.
For Arendt, participatory democracies that rely on "councils" allow for
"a public space in which every citizen could act, speak and disclose her
unique individuality before her peers and to strengthen the ability of
every citizen to form a reasoned opinion, examine it vis-à-vis other
opinions, and be a true participator in government."[^108] However, the
types of participatory democracy that Arendt admires are "historically
rare;" apart from pointing to the classical world, she names a handful
of short-lived instances, usually in revolutionary contexts.[^109]
Contrasting her ideal of councils and participation, our "democratic
states administer and bureaucratize," degrading "citizens into
subjects."[^110] The temptation to satisfy oneself with the solitary,
instrumental existence of the *homo faber* is reinforced by modern
ideology, state infrastructure, and instrumental bureaucratization.
Because large-scale forces soon enter the vacuum left by modern people's
inaction, once we forgo action (and freedom), regaining action is a
challenge. For Arendt, the maintenance of freedom is precarious under
these circumstances where work is so satisfying, action is so demanding,
and states and ideologues are so opportunistic. Therefore, Arendt also
warns that simply the downfall of ideologies like Nazism or Stalinism
does not eliminate the potential of totalitarian tendencies in a
society. Anywhere action is at risk, so too is freedom and meaning. In
turning away from the responsibilities of the man of action, *homo
faber* seals his fate.

**The *Vita Activa* and Arendt's Political Thought**

Apart from her typology of labor, work, and action, Arendt's most famous
themes include: totalitarianism, "the banality of evil," and revolution.
All of these areas relate to Arendt's understanding of human activity
and the possibility of freedom in the modern era. Jeffrey Isaac reminds
us that we must examine Arendt's thought "historically" because her
context clarifies for readers that "her model of action was, above all,
an effort to understand how the dreams of modern ideologues had produced
monstrous nightmares and how it might be possible to reconstitute human
dignity and freedom in a world laid waste by such nightmares."[^111]
Unique among the perspectives studied in this volume, Arendt's account
of human effort, activity, and work was bound up with understanding
human atrocity and human liberty.

Arendt's 1951 *The Origins of Totalitarianism* is an impressive attempt
to grapple with "the critical elements---the practices, events,
experiences, and attitudes---present in Europe between 1880 and 1933,
elements whose combination made the emergence of something like
totalitarianism possible."[^112] Arendt makes, as Hans Morgenthau
writes, an "outstanding contribution" within political theory by
identifying "totalitarianism as a new form of government."[^113]
Aristotle's classical typology of governmental regimes that had
long-influenced modern typologies was inadequate in the effort to
comprehend the "phenomenon of totalitarianism as it appears in Nazism
and Bolshevism."[^114] Arendt says that the "total domination"
characteristic of totalitarianism is distinct "from other forms of
political oppression known to us such as despotism, tyranny and
dictatorship" and "that none of our traditional, legal, moral, or common
sense utilitarian categories" serve us in making sense of these types of
regimes.[^115] This reflection prompts Arendt's analysis of "whether
\[totalitarianism\] has its own essence."[^116] Totalitarianism is not
simply "tyranny;" it also features "an ideology" that assures coming
atrocities and "the bureaucratization of" both "political power" and
"terror."[^117]

Though *The Human Condition* was published after Arendt's work on
totalitarianism, Arendt's account of action relates to her understanding
of totalitarianism. For Arendt, totalitarian ideology promotes an
environment which eliminates "spontaneity," that is, the ability to
"initiate."[^118] These terms, of course, put us in mind of Arendt's
definition of human action. The totalitarian environment was explicitly
manifest "in the concentration camps," that stole from individuals their
capacity for action and their freedom by destroying first the "legal"
and the "moral person," and then lastly "individuality itself."[^119] At
the end of this process, there are no "persons capable of action;"
rather, "there are simply bundles of reactions" with no discernible
"free will."[^120] As Arendt says, the domination of the totalitarian
regime is complete when men become "marionettes without the slightest
trace of spontaneity" and "specimen\[s\] of the animal-species
man."[^121] To the totalitarian regime, "individuality" becomes
"intolerable."[^122] Of course, most observers sense that totalitarian
regimes destroy freedom, but Arendt explains how this happens; and her
later exploration of action further elucidates the intersection of these
regimes and human nature. Totalitarianism attacks the already fragile
human capacity for action, and in so doing, supresses freedom.

Arendt also famously named the idea of "the banality of evil," which
emerged from her 1963 study of Nazi functionary Adolf Eichmann's trial
in Jerusalem. Outside the typical categories, Eichmann embodied a
startlingly different species of criminality, for Arendt.[^123] She
thought Eichmann was intriguingly average, and she concluded that the
evil of the Holocaust included a type of "banal" evil perpetrated, not
by masterminds, but regular people "who viewed themselves as
implementing policy and doing their jobs."[^124] According to Arendt,
Eichmann "had no motives" apart from his "extraordinary diligence in
looking out for his personal advancement."[^125] Eichmann's "sheer
thoughtlessness" is what "predisposed him to become one of the greatest
criminals of that period."[^126] This thoughtlessness led Arendt to her
fascination with the faculty of judgment and her efforts to reestablish
the significance of judgement within politics and to reunite thought and
action, which had been long since severed within the philosophical
tradition.

Arendt investigated this type of evil following the publication of *The
Human Condition*, and her account of the "thoughtlessness" of this form
of evil relates to her concern for the deterioration of human action and
true political participation.[^127] Eichmann represented a situation in
which critical faculties had deteriorated in the face of unthinkingly
following the precept that "a law is a law."[^128] In Eichmann's case,
the evil he committed could be "banal" because only the simple execution
of "the law" is required under a government that is "criminal" in order
to carry out "extreme evil."[^129] Eichmann was not a man of action. The
banal character of human atrocity can emerge where individuals turn from
the participatory, social, and spontaneous character of action, forgo
liberty, and obey reactively. Villa notes that Arendt's account of the
*vita activa* prompts readers to realize that the maintenance of liberty
necessitates "a relatively stable human artifice of the sort
totalitarianism makes impossible."[^130] A sphere of human activity that
encompasses the participation, sociability, and spontaneity of action
fortifies civilizations against the threats of totalitarianism and its
subsidiary "banal" evils.

Lastly, Arendt's attention to the theme of revolution offers a more
"optimistic" lens on action because, where her earlier works address the
urgent concerns related to action, *On Revolution* (1963) praises
"initiatory political action" and the prospect of social change.[^131]
For Arendt, revolution entails "a new beginning," "violence" that
establishes "an altogether different form of government" and "body
politic," and "liberation from oppression."[^132] In establishing her
account of revolution, Arendt criticized standard interpretations of
revolution. Albrecht Wellmer explains that Arendt concludes "both
liberal democrats and Marxists have misunderstood the drama of modern
revolutions," due to neglecting the truly "revolutionary" aspect
therein, which was an effort to institute "a political space of public
freedom" where "free and equal citizens" could negotiate "their common
concerns."[^133] This oversight is due to the tendency of "the liberals
and the Marxists" to organize political ideas in terms of "something
beyond politics."[^134] Arendt's understanding of revolution is more
grounded in ongoing political life, rather than a social ideal "beyond
politics."

For Arendt, reflecting on revolution, and the type of freedom immanent
in revolution, allows her to establish "an idea of political freedom,"
that was distinct from existing philosophical conventions.[^135] As
Wellmer notes, she estimates that "the modern tradition of political
thought" neglects "the experience of political action among equal yet
diverse peers," and thereby it cannot provide a thorough account of
"political freedom."[^136]

**Activity and Freedom**

This chapter addresses Arendt's account of human activity and highlights
the temptations of instrumentalization, the burdens of action, and the
risks posed to liberty in the modern era. Examination of Arendt's
hierarchy of labor, work, and action demonstrates her partiality to
action, which she defines in contradistinction to the necessity of labor
and the instrumentality of work. Action, though not urgent as labor is,
emerges as the most important of the three activities, and without
action, the other activities cannot take place. For Arendt, action is
linked to political life and the exercise of freedom. Therefore, her
concern for the fragility of action is also a concern for the fragility
of free, participatory politics. In turn, we can understand Arendt's
analysis of the human condition, and these activities we undertake, as
related to her philosophical interest in larger political themes like
the evils of totalitarianism and the opportunities of revolution.

This volume addresses work from a variety of perspectives, and some may
address links between work and freedom. Arendt's perspective, however,
is unusual in how her analysis of human activity relates to her analysis
of human atrocity. Moreover, her skepticism of work in particular, as a
seductive substitute to that which keeps us free and atrocity at
bay---that is, action---offers a radical alternative to prevailing
perspectives. She neither celebrates work, nor wholly disavows it, but
she does demand we think more carefully about work because the
possibility of freedom is at stake.

Finally, this very theme of thinking carefully defined Arendt's later
contributions, which had roots in her understanding of action, and the
critical thinking, politics, and initiative that action entails. In
later writings, she turns her attention more directly to examining
"thinking, willing, and judging" as "the three basic mental
activities."[^137] It appears therefore that, as Villa notes, "the
pre-eminent theorist of the *vita activa* concluded her life by
re-engaging the *vita contemplativa*."[^138] Now, however, she was less
disparaging of the "anti-political" nature of the life of the mind and
fully committed to philosophical contemplation, which had fascinated her
since adolescence.[^139] Ultimately, she hoped to reunite these *vitas*,
without hierarchy. She died in 1975, leaving historians and storytellers
with the fruit of her thought and action and the task of determining
"what it was all about."[^140]

**Bibliography**

Arendt, Hannah. *Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of
Evil*. London: Penguin, 2022.

---------. *On Revolution*. London:
Penguin, 2006.

---------. *Origins Of Totalitarianism*. London: Penguin,
2017.

---------. *The Human Condition*. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2018.

---------. *The Life Of The Mind*. Edited by Mary McCarthy.
New York: Harcourt, Inc., 1981.


Benhabib, Seyla. "Feminist Theory and
Hannah Arendt's Concept of Public Space." *History of the Human
Sciences* 6, no. 2 (1993): 97--114.


Cane, Lucy. "Hannah Arendt on the
Principles of Political Action." *European Journal of Political Theory*
14, no. 1 (2015): 55--75.


Courtine-Denamy, Sylvie. *Three Women in Dark
Times: Edith Stein, Hannah Arendt, Simone Weil*. Translated by Geoffrey
M. Goshgarian. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2001.


Dietz, Mary G.
"Feminist Receptions of Hannah Arendt." In *Feminist Interpretations of
Hannah Arendt*, edited by Bonnie Honig, 17--50. Philadelphia:
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1995.

Fayard, Anne-Laure. "Notes on
the Meaning of Work: Labor, Work, and Action in the 21st Century."
*Journal of Management Inquiry* 30, no. 2 (2021): 207--20.

Hill, Samantha
Rose. *Hannah Arendt*. London: Reaktion Books, 2021.


Isaac, Jeffrey C.
"Situating Hannah Arendt on Action and Politics." *Political Theory* 21,
no. 3 (1993): 534--40.


Jansson, Inger, and Petra Wagman. "Hannah Arendt's
Vita Activa: A Valuable Contribution to Occupational Science." *Journal
of Occupational Science* 24, no. 3 (2017): 290--301.


Kateb, George.
"Political Action: Its Nature and Advantages." In *The Cambridge
Companion to Hannah Arendt*, 130--48. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2001.


Kohn, Jerome. "Freedom: The Priority of the Political." In
*The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt*, 113--29. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2001.


Lederman, Shmuel. "Philosophy, Politics
and Participatory Democracy in Hannah Arendt's Political Thought."
*History of Political Thought* 37, no. 3 (2016): 480--508.


Morgenthau,
Hans. "Hannah Arendt on Totalitarianism and Democracy." *Social
Research* 44, no. 1 (1977): 127--31.


Villa, Dana. *Hannah Arendt: A Very
Short Introduction*. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2023.Villa, Dana
R. "Introduction: The Development of Arendt's Political Thought." In
*The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt*, 1--21. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2001.

---------. *Politics, Philosophy, Terror: Essays
on the Thought of Hannah Arendt*. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1999.

Voice, Paul. "Labour, Work and Action." In *Hannah Arendt: Key
Concepts*, edited by Patrick Hayden, 36--51. London: Routledge,
2014.


Walsh, Philip. "The Human Condition as Social Ontology: Hannah
Arendt on Society, Action and Knowledge." *History of the Human
Sciences* 24, no. 2 (2011): 120--37.


Wellmer, Albrecht. "Arendt on
Revolution." In *The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt*, 220--41.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.


Winham, Ilya. "Rereading
Hannah Arendt's 'What Is Freedom?': Freedom as a Phenomenon of Political
Virtuosity." *Theoria: A Journal of Social and Political Theory* 59, no.
131 (2012): 84--106.


Wolin, Sheldon S. "Hannah Arendt: Democracy and The
Political." *Salmagundi*, no. 60 (1983): 3--19.


[^1]: Philip Walsh, "The Human Condition as Social Ontology: Hannah
    Arendt on Society, Action and Knowledge," *History of the Human
    Sciences* 24, no. 2 (2011): 120--37; Inger Jansson and Petra Wagman,
    "Hannah Arendt's Vita Activa: A Valuable Contribution to
    Occupational Science," *Journal of Occupational Science* 24, no. 3
    (2017): 290--301; Anne-Laure Fayard, "Notes on the Meaning of Work:
    Labor, Work, and Action in the 21st Century," *Journal of Management
    Inquiry* 30, no. 2 (2021): 207--20.

[^2]: Samantha Rose Hill, *Hannah Arendt* (London: Reaktion Books,
    2021).

[^3]: For feminist critique: Seyla Benhabib, "Feminist Theory and Hannah
    Arendt's Concept of Public Space," *History of the Human Sciences*
    6, no. 2 (1993): 97--114. Dietz argues that feminist interpreters
    have misunderstood Arendt's work by relying too much on the gender
    binary in addressing her work: Mary G. Dietz, "Feminist Receptions
    of Hannah Arendt," in *Feminist Interpretations of Hannah Arendt*,
    ed. Bonnie Honig (Philadelphia: Pennsylvania State University Press,
    1995), 17--50. For details of "the antidemocratic strain in Arendt's
    thought" and its evolution, see: Sheldon S. Wolin, "Hannah Arendt:
    Democracy and The Political," *Salmagundi*, no. 60 (1983): 3--19.

[^4]: Hill, *Hannah Arendt*, 8.

[^5]: Arendt quoted in: Sylvie Courtine-Denamy, *Three Women in Dark
    Times: Edith Stein, Hannah Arendt, Simone Weil*, trans. Geoffrey M.
    Goshgarian (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2001), 18.

[^6]: Dana Villa, *Hannah Arendt: A Very Short Introduction* (Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 2023), 5.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Hill, *Hannah Arendt*, 8.

[^9]: Ibid., 8.

[^10]: Villa, *Arendt*, 8.

[^11]: Hill, *Hannah Arendt*, 8.

[^12]: Hannah Arendt, *The Human Condition* (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 2018), 7.

[^13]: Paul Voice, "Labour, Work and Action," in *Hannah Arendt: Key
    Concepts*, ed. Patrick Hayden (London: Routledge, 2014), 36.

[^14]: Arendt, *The Human Condition*, 14.

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Ibid., 14--15.

[^17]: Ibid., 15.

[^18]: Ibid., 17.

[^19]: Ibid., 15.

[^20]: Ibid., 16.

[^21]: Ibid., 17.

[^22]: Ibid., 17.

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: Ibid.

[^25]: Ibid., 7.

[^26]: Ibid., 7.

[^27]: Ibid., 87.

[^28]: Ibid., 87.

[^29]: Ibid., 96.

[^30]: Ibid.

[^31]: Ibid., 7.

[^32]: Ibid.

[^33]: Ibid.

[^34]: Ibid., 136.

[^35]: Ibid., 136.

[^36]: Ibid., 136--37.

[^37]: Ibid., 139.

[^38]: Ibid.

[^39]: Ibid., 140.

[^40]: Ibid., 140--41.

[^41]: Ibid., 141.

[^42]: Ibid., 143.

[^43]: Ibid.

[^44]: Ibid.

[^45]: Winham looks to Hegel: Ilya Winham, "Rereading Hannah Arendt's
    'What Is Freedom?': Freedom as a Phenomenon of Political
    Virtuosity," *Theoria: A Journal of Social and Political Theory* 59,
    no. 131 (2012): 88--101. For "a more nuanced conception of action
    than many readings of her thought allow," see: Lucy Cane, "Hannah
    Arendt on the Principles of Political Action," *European Journal of
    Political Theory* 14, no. 1 (2015): 55--75.

[^46]: Arendt, *The Human Condition*, 7.

[^47]: Ibid.

[^48]: Ibid., 8.

[^49]: Ibid., 8--9.

[^50]: Ibid., 9.

[^51]: Ibid.

[^52]: Ibid., 176.

[^53]: Ibid., 176.

[^54]: Ibid., 176.

[^55]: Ibid., 176.

[^56]: Ibid., 177.

[^57]: Ibid., 178.

[^58]: Ibid., 188.

[^59]: Ibid., 176--77.

[^60]: Voice, "Labour, Work and Action," 47.

[^61]: George Kateb, "Political Action: Its Nature and Advantages," in
    *The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 2001), 133.

[^62]: Ibid., 133--34.

[^63]: Jerome Kohn, "Freedom: The Priority of the Political," in *The
    Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 2001), 120.

[^64]: Voice, "Labour, Work and Action," 47.

[^65]: Ibid.

[^66]: Ibid., 47.

[^67]: Kohn, "Freedom: The Priority of the Political," 124.

[^68]: Arendt, *The Human Condition*, 8.

[^69]: Ibid.

[^70]: Ibid.

[^71]: Ibid., 8.

[^72]: Kohn, "Freedom: The Priority of the Political," 126--27.

[^73]: Arendt, *The Human Condition*, 17.

[^74]: Voice, "Labour, Work and Action," 36.

[^75]: Arendt, *The Human Condition*, 144.

[^76]: Ibid., 144.

[^77]: Ibid., 144.

[^78]: Ibid., 144.

[^79]: Ibid., 153.

[^80]: Ibid.

[^81]: Ibid.

[^82]: Ibid.

[^83]: Ibid., 153.

[^84]: Ibid., 154--55.

[^85]: Ibid., 155.

[^86]: Ibid., 155.

[^87]: Ibid., 155.

[^88]: Ibid., 155.

[^89]: Ibid., 155.

[^90]: Ibid.

[^91]: Ibid., 156.

[^92]: Ibid., 157.

[^93]: Ibid., 190.

[^94]: Ibid., 190.

[^95]: Ibid., 190.

[^96]: Ibid., 190.

[^97]: Ibid.

[^98]: Ibid., 191.

[^99]: Ibid.

[^100]: Ibid.

[^101]: Ibid., 192.

[^102]: Ibid., 192.

[^103]: Dana R. Villa, *Politics, Philosophy, Terror: Essays on the
    Thought of Hannah Arendt* (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
    1999), 190.

[^104]: Ibid.

[^105]: Dana R. Villa, "Introduction: The Development of Arendt's
    Political Thought," in *The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt*
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 8.

[^106]: Ibid., 8.

[^107]: Ibid.

[^108]: Shmuel Lederman, "Philosophy, Politics and Participatory
    Democracy in Hannah Arendt's Political Thought," *History of
    Political Thought* 37, no. 3 (2016): 508.

[^109]: Voice, "Labour, Work and Action," 48.

[^110]: Ibid.

[^111]: Jeffrey C. Isaac, "Situating Hannah Arendt on Action and
    Politics," *Political Theory* 21, no. 3 (1993): 539.

[^112]: Villa, *Arendt*, 16--17.

[^113]: Hans Morgenthau, "Hannah Arendt on Totalitarianism and
    Democracy," *Social Research* 44, no. 1 (1977): 127.

[^114]: Ibid.

[^115]: Hannah Arendt, *Origins Of Totalitarianism* (London: Penguin,
    2017), 604.

[^116]: Ibid., 605.

[^117]: Morgenthau, "Totalitarianism and Democracy," 127.

[^118]: Villa, *Politics, Philosophy, Terror*, 13.

[^119]: Ibid., 13, 23, 25, 27.

[^120]: Ibid., 28--29.

[^121]: Arendt, *Origins Of Totalitarianism*, 599.

[^122]: Ibid.

[^123]: Villa, *Arendt*, 100.

[^124]: Ibid., 98.

[^125]: Hannah Arendt, *Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality
    of Evil* (London: Penguin, 2022), 286.

[^126]: Ibid., 286--87.

[^127]: Ibid., 286.

[^128]: Villa, *Politics, Philosophy, Terror*, 52.

[^129]: Ibid.

[^130]: Ibid., 187.

[^131]: Villa, *Arendt*, 74.

[^132]: Hannah Arendt, *On Revolution* (London: Penguin, 2006), 25.

[^133]: Albrecht Wellmer, "Arendt on Revolution," in *The Cambridge
    Companion to Hannah Arendt* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    2001), 220.

[^134]: Ibid.

[^135]: Ibid., 222.

[^136]: Ibid.

[^137]: Hannah Arendt, *The Life Of The Mind*, ed. Mary McCarthy (New
    York: Harcourt, Inc., 1981), 69.

[^138]: Villa, "Introduction: The Development of Arendt's Political
    Thought," 16.

[^139]: Ibid.

[^140]: Arendt, *The Human Condition*, 192.
