**Creation, Fall, and (Technological) Redemption: Francis Bacon on Work
and Man's Right over Nature**

Tyler Chamberlain, <Tyler.Chamberlain@twu.ca>

**Introduction**

Nature, in the modern imaginary, is an obstacle to human well-being and
is therefore the subject of human power and technological innovation.
Francis Bacon (1561-1626) was a principal architect of this modern
understanding of nature. This chapter will pay special attention to one
element that played a particularly important role in how Bacon came to
understand nature's resistance to human concerns, on the one hand, and
the way in which something could be done about it: the Judeo-Christian
concept of the fall of man (as chronicled in Genesis 3).

When we pay close attention to Bacon's historico-theological framing
device of the fall of man, we see that the central problem of human
existence is the fact that man has lost his dominion over nature such
that *work*, and not *rest*, is his constant mode. Men must work to toil
the ground and are in constant search for labour-saving devices to
reduce the amount of work required to satisfy their material needs. To
make matters worse, the dominant approach to natural inquiry has proved
unable to produce technological fruit. However, if there were a method
of natural inquiry that could more effectively enable us to manipulate
nature for our benefit, we might be able to enter into God's sabbath
rest, for which we were originally created. This, I shall attempt to
argue, is Bacon's view.

As is the case with any major thinker, the scholarship on Bacon is
marked by a range of interpretations and emphases, but a few key themes
have emerged in the work of disparate commentators. It is generally
agreed that Bacon was interested in increasing man's power over nature
through a novel approach to natural science.[^1] Baconian experimental
science, which itself is the subject of much scholarship, is often tied
to an explicit moral intention. Bacon is thus described as a great
humanitarian.[^2]

Scholars of a Straussian persuasion have deepened this analysis in a
number of important ways, for example by drawing attention to Bacon's
transformation of the relationship between man and nature, by
highlighting his connection to Machiavelli, and by emphasizing some
potentially less-favourable political implications of his thought.
However, much of this work does not deny what the so-called mainstream
commentators have written about Bacon's influence on modern scientific
method.[^3]

Within this consensus, such as it is, lie some interesting
disagreements, the navigating of which will help to clarify the argument
of this chapter. One important debate concerns the role of religion in
Bacon's thought. Robert Faulker, for example, argues that Bacon's
attempt to appear pious is disingenuous, a mask over the subversive
nature of his thought. Bacon, he writes, "revises Christianity toward a
universal creed of humanity that will excuse war against Christian
kingdoms and especially against Christ's kingdom."[^4] A recurring theme
in Faulkner's study is Bacon's transformation of Christianity from an
other-worldly to a this-worldly phenomenon; implied by Faulker, it seems
to me, is that Bacon was not religious in the traditional sense.

Stephen A. Mcknight, on the other hand, suggests that Bacon's thought
can only truly be understood by noting his authentic religious beliefs.
He notes the importance of religious themes throughout Bacon's corpus
and argues that the restoration of a scientific natural philosophy can
only be understood as part of a larger religious restoration.[^5]

The purpose of this chapter is not to settle the question of whether
Bacon believed his own religious statements -- though it will bear on
that question -- but simply to read some of his writings with his
biblical and theological statements in the foreground. Whether or not he
truly believed his statements about, for example, the fall of man, it is
clear that he structured his socio-scientific project in terms of these
biblical and theological categories. The view put forth in this chapter
ends up somewhere in between Faulkner and McKnight. I share the view of
Faulkner and others[^6] that Bacon's project is radically new, yet
McKnight is correct to highlight the theme of religious restoration. As
will be made clear in what follows, these are reconciled by the
recognition that Bacon drastically re-interprets the religious doctrines
to which he appeals. He presents a religiously inspired scientific
project yet does so in distinctly modern and revolutionary terms.

Bacon's work is replete with biblical references and allusions, some of
which will be explored in what follows. For example, the introduction to
*The Great Instauration* refers to the biblical wisdom literature.[^7]
The Old Testament book of Ecclesiastes is filled with repudiations of
human ambition and wisdom, and would thus seem a strange ally for Bacon.
He refers to Ecclesiastes 1:14, which describes the works of man as
"vanity and vexation of spirit."[^8] To avoid what appears to be a
glaring rebuke of his technological project, he interprets this passage
as referring to human works outside of God's design, and not to human
activity that accords with divine ends. "If we labour in your works,"
Bacon writes, "you will make us to share in your vision and in your
Sabbath."[^9] The reference to the Sabbath hints at the eschatological
nature of the Baconian project. Throughout the old and new testaments,
sharing in God's Sabbath rest refers to the overcoming of the curse
placed upon humanity in the Garden of Eden. Consider Saint Augustine's
reference to resting in "the sabbath of eternal life" in his
*Confessions*, or the title of the concluding chapter of *The City of
God*: "Of the Eternal Felicity of the City of God, and of the Perpetual
Sabbath." For Augustine, *the* theologian of medieval Christendom, God's
sabbath rest referred to the Heavenly City in the age to come: "After
this present age God will rest, as it were, on the seventh day, and he
will cause us, who are the seventh day, to find our rest in him."[^10]

Bacon intends for his new method of science to give men the means of
overcoming the struggle of existence that resulted from their fall from
grace -- in the present age, not the next. It need hardly be said that
his this-worldly vision of God's Sabbath rest occurring *in time* and
*as a result of human activity* was a radical departure from traditional
interpretations of the biblical vision.

With these lengthy introductory points made, we can clarify the purpose
of this chapter. It will attempt to read Bacon's scientific works with
two things in view: (1) the question of how the concept of work
influenced his scientific project, and (2) the way in which his
scientific thought was structured by the biblical themes of creation,
fall, and redemption (or restoration). As we will see, these points are
intimately related: it is only through the lens of Bacon's
interpretation of creation, fall, and redemption that the importance of
work and rest come into view. Put simply, I argue that we can read Bacon
as using the fall as a framing device, giving him an account of the
origin of the greatest human difficulties and the categories by which he
attempted to address them. With the fall, mankind's original power over
nature was lost, such that great labour and toil -- that is, *work* --
are required to preserve our fragile lives. Nature is resistant to human
concerns, and even human nature itself is no longer fit to exercise its
original right. The solution, to both non-human nature's resistance and
human nature's inability to control nature, is a new, methodical
approach to natural inquiry. Bacon's method of induction is not simply a
means whereby labour-saving devices may be invented, it itself is a
labour-saving device that allows fallen men to discover the inner
workings of nature in such a way that mankind's original power over
nature can be regained.

**The Fall of Man and the Increase of Labour**

Bacon's understanding of the fall frames his scientific and political
project, explaining why it is necessary and the way in which it can
offer meaningful solutions. To see how, we must begin with his allusions
to divine creation, the fall, and the Sabbath rest. He ends his preface
to [The Great Instauration]{.underline} with a prayer that, among other
things, men may "extract\...from knowledge the poison infused by the
serpent."[^11] He explains: knowledge itself was not the problem, but
rather knowledge infused with pride. Men did not fall simply because
they desired or sought knowledge, for even Adam constructed a system of
knowledge by naming the animals.[^12] Men fell because they pursued
*moral* knowledge and hence the ability to legislate for themselves
without relying on divine guidance. The implication is that as long as
our search for knowledge is animated by *charity* rather than *pride*,
it fulfills the divine mandate to discover the hidden realities of
creation.

The "Plan of the Work," which follows the preface and acts as an
introduction to his entire project, closes with a comparison of divine
creation and the human attempts to create new works within it. It
repeats one of Bacon favourite images, namely God's creating light on
the first day of creation, and only after that creating tangible
benefits -- the implication being that Bacon's inductive method will
create knowledge at first and tangible benefits only after a lengthy
passage of time. The situation men face, however, when attempting to
manipulate nature for their own ends, is different. Instead of being
able to implement an orderly and rational plan, they are met with a
world full of "vanity and vexation of spirit." The world in which men
live is meaningless and impossibly difficult to organize and manipulate.
Because of this, Bacon concludes, "he has no rest."[^13] It is only by
following the scientific method outlined in *The Great Instauration*
that we can enter into the Sabbath rest we have been promised. This is
obviously a this-worldly Sabbath, consisting of the convenient
satisfaction of material wants. There is no explicit reference to the
fall, but it rings loudly in the undertones of this passage, especially
insofar as the problem to be overcome is nature's resistance to human
works and Man's inability to enjoy the Sabbath rest.

These allusions to the fall are augmented by an interesting source:
Bacon's personal confession of faith, which was not printed until years
after his death. The date of composition is not known, though some date
it to before Bacon's knighthood in 1603[^14] -- and therefore relatively
early in his intellectual development.

His confession of faith contains a lengthy discussion of God's character
as creator. All things were made "in their first estate good," and
governed by "constant and everlasting laws," to which Bacon gives the
name *nature*. [^15] These perfect laws were altered as a result of the
fall, in a process Bacon describes as a *privation* of the original
virtue of creation and as a *revocation*. The primary effect of the
fall, therefore, is that the very laws of nature changed for the worse.
The world in which we now live lacks its original virtue, such that it
is no longer conducive to our sharing in God's Sabbath rest. At this
point in his confession there is yet no explicit statement of
traditional theological themes from the creation and fall narrative,
like original sin (Augustine) or total depravity (Calvin). A few
paragraphs later Bacon mentions the defacing of God's image in man, but
interprets this merely in terms of man's ability to subdue nature. The
image of God in man, or that which makes him like God, is his right over
nature, he thereby suggests. By introducing changes to the laws of
nature that make it harder to subdue nature, man's God-given role as
master of nature has been corrupted, or *defaced*, to use Bacon's term.

At this point it is worth dwelling on an important difference between
Bacon's theory of the fall and what was common to prevailing theological
views of the time. Saint Augustine's *City of God*, for example,
interprets the fall of man in primarily moral terms. Through their
initial act of disobedience Adam and Eve fell under the curse of
original sin, which has been passed down to the entire human race. The
main point of contrast for our purposes is that, for Augustine, the most
important result of the fall was moral. Men are now under the control of
evil impulses and passions. Consider the following passage:

> ...in the punishment of that sin the retribution for disobedience is
> simply disobedience itself. For man's wretchedness is nothing but his
> own disobedience to himself, so that because he would not do what he
> could, he now wills to do what he cannot. For in paradise, before his
> sin, man could not, it is true, do everything; but he could do
> whatever he wished, just because he did not want to do whatever he
> could not do\....For who can list all the multitude of things that is,
> while his very mind and even his lower element, his flesh, do not
> submit to his will?[^16]

Nor was this moral conception of the fall unique to Catholic thought.
The reformer John Calvin similarly understood the effects of the fall in
moral terms:

> Original sin, therefore, seems to be a hereditary depravity and
> corruption of our nature, diffused into all the parts of the soul,
> which first makes us liable to God's wrath, then also brings forth in
> us those works which Scripture calls "works of the flesh" \[Gal.
> 5:19\]. And that is properly what Paul often calls sin.[^17]

The conception of the fall accepted by the western church, against which
Bacon was writing, was that it introduced widespread *moral* corruption.
As a result of Adam and Eve's disobedience, men became unavoidably
sinful and hence subject to divine wrath and punishment. To the extent
that this implied a loss of empire over nature, it was secondary to the
moral calamity. Bacon's explanation of the fall amounts to a reversal of
these emphases. He suggests that the primary effect of the fall was a
transformation of the laws of nature that rendered natural phenomena
beyond human control. To the extent that there was a change in human
nature, the most important effect was to affect man's ability to control
nature, not primarily his impulses and passions. According to Bacon, the
human situation sees men subject to a capricious and untameable nature,
not necessarily a corrupted will. I do not deny that Bacon imputed a
moral consequence to the fall as well, referring as he does to man's
loss of innocence.[^18] However, the lesser attention paid to the moral
consequences of the fall, as well as the fact that he typically only
discusses it *after* explaining its effects on mankind's ability to
control nature, indicate that the latter is the more significant
outcome.

This deeper investigation of Bacon's theory of the fall corroborates and
illuminates the way he uses it to frame his project in *The Great
Instauration*. The laws of nature have been corrupted in such a way that
our natural right over nature is no longer possible. He is not only
lamenting non-human nature's inherent patterns of behavior, but men's
natural inclinations and modes of relating to the world. A prominent
theme in *The New Organon* is the uselessness of previous scientific
approaches. Bacon traces these to human nature, which, in light of his
confession of faith, we can think of as following the laws of behavior
that have been corrupted by the fall.

Bacon traces the causes of error to four "idols:" those of the tribe,
cave, marketplace, and theatre.[^19] Idols of the tribe are the elements
of human nature and intellect that impede the mind's access to truth.
The mind is not a passive recipient of truth but allows its tendencies
and preferences to corrupt discovery. Some examples of this natural
tendency are the mind's inability to be content with uncaused brute
facts, its desire to impose order and regularity on everything it
observes, and to impose human purposes on nature.[^20] In short, it is
human nature for men to see what they want to see, and thus the unaided
intellect is not a reliable guide to truth.

These tendencies are common to men and universal in their effects. Idols
of the cave, by

contrast, are those particular influences on each individual that stand
in the way of an accurate

understanding of nature. Some people are affected by education,
upbringing, or chance events[^21]

so as to develop a taste for either novelty or tradition, logic or
observation, or become attuned to either differences or similarities.
The susceptibility to be carried away by particular effects is only made
possible by the nature common to all men, so the idols of the cave
should be understood as *particular* effects of the *universal* idols of
the tribe.

The idols of the marketplace[^22] are the results of communication and
life together,

especially language. Words, which are the primary means of understanding
nature, can never

accurately reflect it and thus have a tendency to lead us astray.
Harmful words are those that refer to things that do not exist or
misrepresent the nature of things. "First mover" is given as an example
of the first kind, and "wet" as an example of the second.[^23]

The fourth set of idols, those of the theatre, explicitly refers to
mistaken philosophies and rules of proof, but a careful look shows that
these philosophies are effects of the first three idols. Our desire for
neat and orderly systems, our individual preferences and inclinations,
and the vagaries of language result in poor abstractions from nature
under the guise of systematic philosophies. A primary target here is
Aristotle, who is accused of making up his mind before conducting
experiments, and using them as post hoc justifications of his
dialectical conclusions.

Bacon admits that Aristotle's intellectual powers surpass those of
everyone else, but without a proper method to mitigate these tendencies,
Aristotle's entire undertaking was hopeless.

Bacon's critique of the idols is important to the argument of this
chapter for two reasons. It points *towards* important elements of his
inductive method, which will be discussed below, but it does not only do
that. It also points *back* towards the fall. As a result of the fall,
human and non-human nature became subject to different natural laws. If
we take seriously Bacon's attribution of the name "nature" to the laws
governing the behavior of natural objects, we can say that the very
"natures" of things changed. Human nature -- i.e. the way humans behave
*naturally* -- has been corrupted by the fall in important ways that
render men unable to exercise their right over the rest of creation. His
doctrine of the idols can therefore be read as his account of what this
looks like in the actual practice of investigating nature. As we will
see below, in *The New Organon*'s account of all hitherto scientific
practice it is akin to blind wanderings that occasionally happen upon a
truth or a useful discovery. It is not due to the skill or method of the
inquirers, but dumb luck.

**Baconian Method as a Labour-Saving Device**

The image of blind wanderings is not the only one Bacon uses to
highlight the difference between his method and previous modes of
natural inquiry. In the preface to the [New Organon]{.underline} he
describes the futility of even the strongest men attempting to move an
impossibly heavy obelisk. Without the proper tools it will not budge;
indeed an observer would regard the men's attempt to move the weight as
lunacy. It is not a matter of the strength (at least within the
limitations of the human body) or number of men. The obelisk will not be
moved unless tools or mechanical devices are devised that can channel
and multiply human strength in the proper ways and towards the desired
end. *Tools*, not *strength*, will allow men to accomplish the task. In
so many words, this is Bacon's vision for how his scientific method will
unlock the hidden secrets of nature. Due to the fall's corruption of
human and non-human nature, men cannot sufficiently know the inner
workings of nature to exercise their right over it. What is needed is a
tool to channel their energies and prevent them from falling subject to
the four idols. This section will briefly describe Bacon's method before
turning to an analysis of some of the images by which he articulates its
importance.

A reinterpretation of nature was required before Bacon's scientific and
socio-political goals could be accomplished. We must therefore highlight
some of the more important points in Bacon's ontology of nature in order
to see how his scientific method was designed to facilitate mastery.

We can best grasp the logic of Bacon's ontology by beginning with his
statement of "the task and purpose of human Power," which is "to
generate and superinduce on a given body a new nature or new
natures."[^24] *The New Organon* reinterprets nature as a collection of
bodies that behave and take on attributes in accordance with laws of
nature. These laws, once understood, can be harnessed to bring about
desired effects. It should be stressed that it is not particularly
important for Bacon *why* the laws of nature are what they are or *how*
a particular law brings about a certain effect; the important thing to
understand is simply *that* a certain cause has the effects that it
does.

In addition to speaking of nature as the realm over which man must
exercise his right of dominion, Bacon speaks of simple and compound
*natures*. Simple natures are qualities or attributes, like colour,
texture, and solidity. Compound natures are substances themselves,
understood by Bacon as combinations of simple natures. The element gold,
for example, is a compound nature consisting of the simple natures
"tawny-coloured," "heavy with a certain weight," "not volatile," and so
on.[^25] The implication here is that a thing is nothing but a
collection of attributes. Compound natures are brought together by the
various laws of act -- Bacon's term for laws of behavior -- that create
the desired individual simple natures. It follows that knowing the laws
of act allows one to create any new compound nature. Bacon calls this
his first axiom of the transformation of bodies.

His second axiom "penetrat\[es\] into the secret recesses of things," to
quote Carolyn Merchant.[^26] Nature consists of simple and compound
natures, both of which are eminently observable, but also of what Bacon
calls latent processes and structures. Beneath the physical attributes
that we perceive are hidden motions of unobservable elementary
particles, of which the simple natures are merely epiphenomenal. Rather
than deciphering the laws of act that correlate with given simple
natures, Bacon's second axiom attempts to understand the workings of
these elementary particles themselves, specifically the way in which
they generate simple natures, with an eye to potential knowledge of how
to generate multiple simple natures at once. This axiom would create
gold not by imposing its constituent simple natures on a given body, but
would learn the process by which nature herself generates gold out of
its elementary substances -- that is, the specific molecular
transformations bodies undergo to become gold. Bacon's approach takes
from both axioms, which suggests that they are ideal types or heuristic
devices meant to demonstrate what is at stake, not either/or approaches
to the mastery of nature. The relevant implications for our purposes are
that Bacon conceives of nature as a series of attribute-bearing objects.
The goal he hopes his method will achieve is to allow men to understand
either how to impose the desired simple natures upon objects of their
choosing (first axiom) or how to replicate the latent processes by which
nature herself produces compound natures (second axiom).

Bacon's inductive method is crafted to suit the goal of human power,
quoted above as the ability "to generate and superinduce on a given body
a new nature or new natures."[^27] That is, it is not designed to
understand the logic connecting various causes and effects, or how all
things work together to create a well-order cosmos, but only to generate
the knowledge required to make nature do what men want it to do. The
preceding discussion reveals that this is accomplished by the knowledge
of the causes of simple natures and the unobservable latent structures.
He seeks this knowledge by a rigorous enumeration of instances of the
presence or absence of simple natures. The goal is to find the necessary
and sufficient causes of each, and to eliminate spurious causes. Bacon
demonstrates its use by meticulously enumerating every known natural
occurring instance of heat; this is called the "table of existence and
presence."[^28] His next step is to enumerate a list of instances that
are similar to these but do not produce heat; this is the "table of
divergence, or of closely related absences."[^29] Whereas the table of
existence and presence includes the *sun's* rays, the second table notes
-- incorrectly, as is now known -- the fact that the *moon's* rays do
not provide heat. This narrows down the source of heat by indicating
that not all rays of light from heavenly bodies are hot.

The third table -- the "table of degrees"[^30] -- records instances in
which the nature is present either potentially or to a certain degree.
Bacon's reason for enumerating these instances is that "a nature is not
accepted as a true form \[i.e. cause\] unless it always decreases when
the nature itself decreases, and likewise always increases when the
nature itself increases."[^31] For example, he distinguishes between the
extreme heat of fires and the mild warmth of living creatures.
Enumerating greater and lesser degrees of a given nature provides even
greater specificity in correlating it with prior causes. These three
tables constitute the first stage of Bacon's method, the "presentation
of instances to the intellect."[^32] They indicate that he is looking
for things, events, or conditions that are perfectly correlated with
heat. The three tables together enumerate the instances of heat, the
closely related absences of heat, and conditions of greater and lesser
heat.

The next task is to "exclude" all natures or instances that do not
correlate with the nature under investigation. This exclusion, or
elimination, of all spurious causes is the basis of Stephen Gaukroger's
term "eliminative induction."[^33] Because the goal is exact
correlation, natures that increase when the given nature decreases, or
vice versa, are to be excluded. For the effect *heat*, he rejects
natures such as heavenly nature, light, texture, and rarity, since there
is at least one falsifying instance of heat being present when each of
these is not.

The goal, as we have seen, is knowledge of laws of act or behavior.
Bacon is here inferring causality from perfect correlation, and at one
point he claims that a single falsifying instance is enough to disprove
a causal law.[^34] Precise knowledge of each and every instance that has
a correlative relationship with a given nature is as good as knowledge
of the causes of that nature. Viewed from within the goal of
manipulating natural processes, perfect correlation is all that is
necessary.

To connect this lengthy discussion of his scientific method to the
argument of this chapter, I will briefly consider some of the images
through which Bacon depicts his method. Recalling the prior discussion
of the fall and the four idols, the method of eliminative induction was
explicitly designed to make up for man's natural (more accurately, we
could say, post-fall) inability to adequately understand nature's inner
workings. The specific ways in which it makes up for this inability is
presented in the following ways.

At many points he refers to the method as an aid to the senses: "Neither
the bare hand nor the unaided intellect has much power; the work is done
by tools and assistance."[^35] This means at least two things. First,
knowledge of unobservable latent structures cannot be gained by unaided
observation alone, but is best attained by making nature undergo "the
trials and vexations of art."[^36] It is only by putting nature in
certain positions and subjecting it to particular pressures that can we
exact the kind of knowledge of it that can be made useful. Second, the
method of strictly recording all presences and absences assists the
intellect in forming proper conclusions from what is observed and
recorded. We can put this another way by saying that Bacon's method
provides assistance to the understanding by *regulating* it.[^37]

It regulates by imposing harsh rules. That is, even though his method
will liberate mankind by opening up new possibilities for innovation and
thereby unleashing human potential, it does this by imposing strict
constraints on what is inferred from what we observe. He makes this
point with an oft-repeated image of the scientist as a blind wanderer,
collecting observations as they suit his fancy but lacking an orderly
schema or set of rules to guide him towards useful observations.[^38]
Such a person may chance upon a true or useful discovery, but an
organized plan of regulating and tabulating observations is much more
likely to produce reliable knowledge of the laws of act.[^39]

Perhaps the most memorable piece of imagery to this effect is Bacon's
statement that "we do not need to give men's understanding wings, but
rather lead and weights, to check every leap and flight."[^40] As we
recall from the four idols, a natural inclination is to immediately jump
from a few observations to metaphysical flights of fancy like innate
purposes and forms. Bacon's method, by contrast, forces the scientist to
gather more observations, and indeed use those observations to produce
further research questions that require their own observations, and so
on. The method is specifically designed to encourage the scientist to
gather observations in an orderly manner and to avoid large inferences
from a small dataset.

A similar way of making the same point is Bacon's comparison of his
method to a road. The imagery of lead and weights is used to highlight
the superiority of Bacon's method to Aristotle's method of natural
inquiry; the road imagery serves the rhetorical purpose of downplaying
Bacon's claim to intellectual superiority. His method is a particular
road, as was Aristotle's; moreover, one's ability to reach the
destination is more a function of the road taken than the skill of the
traveller. In the preface to *The New Organon*, Bacon writes that "if we
maintained that we achieve better results than the ancients while
following the same road as they, we should not by any skill with words
be able to avoid setting up a comparison or contest in intellectual
capacity or excellence."[^41] The very title of *The New Organon* --
that is, the replacement of Aristotle's organon -- signals that Bacon is
in fact setting up a contest between himself and the ancients. It is not
a contest of *intelligence*, though, but of *tools or instruments*. The
main selling point of Bacon's method is that, like any tool or
labour-saving device, it can be put to good use by almost anyone
regardless of intelligence. Bacon thus makes the success of the modern
scientific enterprise hang on the method, or road, used, not the
capacity of individual scientists.

Aphorism 1.82, which opens by presenting the method as a road better
suited to lead men into truth and utility, introduces another image of
the method as lamp. The illumination metaphor is easy enough to grasp,
though the combination of conceptualizing his method as both road and
lamp is a unique mixing of metaphors: as good as the road is, the way
must still be lit. The specific way in which following his method is
akin to a lamp hearkens back to his gloss on the order of creation: God
first created light and brought order to the universe, and only then
created tangible and useful things. The highly regularized way in which
his method constrains the intellect -- with "lead and weights," as it
were -- produces many insights which have no direct practical use but
serve to guide future researchers towards experiments that *will*
produce useful knowledge.

The consequences of faithfully following his method are summed up in the
opening parable of many strong men failing to move a heavy obelisk.
Bacon's method is akin to a device that can move heavy objects. It is
worth dwelling on this metaphor, as it highlights the relationship
between human intellectual capacity, his scientific method, and its
character as a labour-saving device. Bacon does not in this example
describe the hypothetical "tools or machines" (p. 29) he imagines moving
the obelisk, but it is not out of the question that something like
pulleys or wedges would fit the bill.[^42] Common to simple machines
like these is the concept of mechanical advantage, or the amplification
of force. By the effective use of gear ratios or similar means, a normal
amount of force can move an immense weight a small distance or a small
weight a great distance. One can imagine a team of men easily moving the
obelisk with a well-designed pulley or ramp system. This is the
orienting depiction of Bacon's method of eliminative induction.
Understanding the latent structures and processes of nature is an
immense task, impossible for the unaided intellect alone -- akin to
moving an obelisk by hand. However, by forcing scientists to remain
within a carefully prescribed series of experiments, tabulations, and
observations, slow and steady progress may be made towards unleashing
the full power of nature in order to remove the burden of work brought
on by the fall.

**Conclusion**

This chapter has attempted to deepen our understanding of Bacon's
project of technological mastery. It takes as its starting point the
common view that Bacon was instrumental in laying the groundwork for
modern technological science as we know it. It does not address the
dispute over whether modern science has produced more harm than good,
important as that question is.[^43] Rather, it has sought to shed light
on the importance of a theme that never received a systematic discussion
in any of Bacon's scientific works yet remains impossible for the
careful reader to ignore. The biblical themes of creation, fall, and the
hope for Sabbath rest are interspersed throughout Bacon's corpus, such
that when taken seriously new light is shed on his project. Bacon
depicts a world over which men have the right to rule but which
nevertheless resists their best efforts. His novel scientific method is
therefore presented as the means whereby God's original plan for
creation can be restored and men can rest from their labour. Adam and
Eve's sinful desire for moral knowledge drastically -- and tragically --
increased the amount of work required to conquer nature; Bacon's
charitable desire for scientific knowledge can reduce the burden of work
and allow the human race to enter into God's promised Sabbath rest. That
the curse of the fall is the main problem to overcome is borne out by
the final sentences of *The New Organon*, which in closing I quote at
length:

> For by the Fall man declined from the state of innocence and from his
> kingdom over the creatures. Both things can be repaired even in this
> life to some extent, the former by religion and faith, the latter by
> the arts and sciences. For the Curse did not make the creation an
> utter and irrevocable outlaw. In virtue of the sentence 'In the sweat
> of thy face shalt thou eat bread', man, by manifold labours (and not
> by disputations, certainly, or by useless magical ceremonies), compels
> the creation, in time and in part, to provide him with bread, that is,
> to serve the purposes of human life.[^44]

[^1]: Stephen Gaukroger, *Francis Bacon and the Transformation of
    Early-Modern Philosophy* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    2001); John Henry, *Knowledge is Power: How Magic, the Government
    and an Apocalyptic Vision inspired Francis Bacon to create Modern
    Science* (Cambridge: Icon Books, 2003).

[^2]: See, for example, F.H. Anderson, *The Philosophy of Francis Bacon*
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948), quoted in Benjamin
    Farrington, *The Philosophy of Francis Bacon* (Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press, 1964), 16.

[^3]: Straussian commentaries are manifold, but the following are
    emblematic of this approach: Richard Kennington, *On Modern Origins:
    Essays on Early Modern Philosophy*, Edited by Pamela Krauss and
    Frank Hunt (Lanham: Lexington Books, 2004), Laurence Lampert,
    *Nietzsche and Modern Times: A Study of Bacon, Descartes, and
    Nietzsche* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993), and Robert K.
    Faulkner, *Francis Bacon and the Project of Progress* (Lanham:
    Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 1993).

[^4]: Faulkner, *Francis Bacon*, 226.

[^5]: Stephen A. McKnight, *The Religious Foundations of Francis Bacon's
    Thought* (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 2006). See also
    Kennington, *On Modern Origins*, 1-14, for an interpretation of
    Bacon's scientific project that pays attention to his use of the
    bible.

[^6]: Howard B. White, *Peace Among the Willows: The Political
    Philosophy of Francis Bacon* (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1968);
    Jerry Weinberger, *Science, Faith, and Politics: Francis Bacon and
    the Utopian Roots of the Modern Age* (Ithica: Cornell University
    Press, 1985).

[^7]: Francis Bacon, *The New Organon*, Edited by Lisa Jardine and
    Michael Silverthorne (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2000
    \[1620\]), 24.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Saint Augustine, *Confessions*, Translated by Henry Chadwick
    (Oxford: Oxford University Press 1998 \[400\]), 8.51; Saint
    Augustine, *The City of God*, Translated by Henry Bettenson (London:
    Penguin Books 2003 \[427\]), 1091.

[^11]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 12.

[^12]: See also in Bacon's *Advancement of Learning* \[1605\]: "The
    first acts which man performed in paradise \[that is, before the
    fall\] consisted of the two summary parts of knowledge; the view of
    creatures, and the imposition of names." Francis Bacon, *The Major
    Works*, Edited by Brian Vickers (Oxford: Oxford University Press
    2002), 149-150.

[^13]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 24.

[^14]: Brian Vickers' editorial note to "A Confession of Faith" in
    Francis Bacon, *The Major Works*, Edited by Brian Vickers (Oxford:
    Oxford University Press 2002), 560.

[^15]: Bacon, *The Major Works*, 108. It is worth noting here that this
    depiction of the world as being composed of material objects acting
    according to external laws of nature is significantly different than
    the classical teleological view. This component of Bacon's thought
    is beyond the scope of this chapter but is nevertheless worth
    drawing attention to.

[^16]: Saint Augustine, *The City of God*, 575. Obviously this is not a
    complete account of Augustine's theory of original sin. For more,
    the reader is referred to *City of God* books XIII-XIV,
    *Confessions* Book VIII. ix-xi, and William E. Mann, "Augustine on
    Evil and Original Sin," in *The Cambridge Companion to Augustine*,
    Edited by Eleonore Stump and Norman Kretzmann. (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press 2001), 40-48.

[^17]: John Calvin, *Institutes of the Christian Religion, volume one*,
    Translated by Ford Lewis Battles (Louisville: Westminster John Knox
    Press 2006 \[1559\]), 251.

[^18]: McKnight regular describes Bacon's project as concerning "the
    relation of humanity to nature and to God." McKnight, *Religious
    Foundations*[,]{.underline} 46-47. This dual emphasis on man's
    reconciliation to nature (through technology) and God (through
    Christian salvation) is a repeated theme in McKnight's work.

[^19]: Bacon, *The New Organon* 1.29-30. All references to *The New
    Organon* itself, as opposed to the various introductory materials
    included with it, are to the book and aphorism number.

[^20]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 1.45-50.

[^21]: Bacon, *The New Organon* 1.53.

[^22]: Jardine and Silverthorne point out in a textual note that
    "marketplace," despite being the traditional translation,

    obscures the meaning. A more literal term would be "forum" or
    "townsquare": "the place where men meet and talk

    and reinforce each others' 'idols'." Bacon, *The New Organon*,
    48n20.

[^23]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 1.60.

[^24]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.1.

[^25]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.5.

[^26]: Carolyn Merchant, *Autonomous Nature: Problems of Prediction and
    Control from Ancient Times to the Scientific Revolution* (New York:
    Routledge 2015), 91.

[^27]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.1.

[^28]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.11.

[^29]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.12.

[^30]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.13.

[^31]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.13.

[^32]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.15.

[^33]: Gaukroger, *Francis Bacon*, 138.

[^34]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.18.

[^35]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 1.2; see also 1.21, 1.67, 1.126.

[^36]: Bacon, as quoted in Merchant, *Autonomous Nature*, 81.

[^37]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 1.126.

[^38]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 1.82.

[^39]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 1.47, 1.70, 1.73, 1.108, 1.126.

[^40]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 1.104.

[^41]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, p. 29; see also 1.61, 1.76, 1.82.

[^42]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, p. 29.

[^43]: This itself would require a lengthy treatment, beginning with the
    effects of particular technological devices, leading into a treating
    of the overall ecological effect of modern technology, and
    culminating in a reflection on the ontological transformations
    ushered in by technological thinking. The reader is directed to the
    following sources: Carolyn Merchant, *Autonomous Nature*; C.S.
    Lewis, *The Abolition of Man* (New York: Simon & Schuster 1996
    \[1994\]); Martin Heidegger, *The Question Concerning Technology and
    other Essays*[,]{.underline} Translated by William Lovitt (New York:
    Harper 1977); George Grant, *English-Speaking Justice* (Toronto:
    House of Anansi Press 1974) & *Technology and Justice* (Concord:
    House of Anansi Press 1986).

[^44]: Bacon, *The New Organon*, 2.52.
