# Work in Catholic Social Teaching

[Gene Callahan](../bios/callahan.md), New York University

## Introduction

What is today known as Catholic social teaching, while having ancient roots,
began to clearly emerge first in Pope Leo XIII's 1891 encyclical letter *Rerum
novarum*. It was elaborated and expanded upon by the writings of the first
"distributists," G.K. Chesterton and Hilarire Belloc, and took practical form
in the establishment of the Mondragon Cooperative Corporation in Spain, in
Dorothy Day's Catholic Worker Movement, and in the Christian democracy movement.

Catholic social teaching holds that work is a key component of a flourishing
human life, but only so long as the worker is treated with dignity, receives
fair pay, and has the right to organize in order to change unsatisfactory
working conditions. As such, it offers an important "third way" between
capitalism and socialism.



Pope Benedict XVI (2005):

I'm taken in mind to how, in the New Testament, in the profession of Jesus
before his public ministry, the word "tecton" appears, which we translate as
"carpenter," because then homes were mostly homes of wood. But, more than a
"carpenter," it's an "artisan" who is able to make everything necessary for the
construction of a house. So, in this sense, you are "colleagues" of Our Lord,
as you've taken up what he did willingly, according to his own choice, before
he announced to the world his great mission.

The Lord has wished to show in this way the nobility of this work. In the Greek
world, only intellectual work was considered worthy of a free man. Manual labor
was left to the slaves. It's totally different in biblical religion. Here, the
Creator — who, in a beautiful image, made man with his own hands — himself
appears to give us the example of a man working with his hands and, in doing
so, working with his mind and with his heart. Man imitates the Creator because
this world given to us by his hand is an inhabitable world. This appears in the
biblical story from the very start. But always, in a powerful way, in the fact
that Jesus was "tecton," "artisan" — "worker" — appears the nobility and
greatness of this work.


# Bibliography

- Belloc, Hilaire. *The Servile State*. [S.I.]: Seven Treasures Publications, 2014.

- Benedict XVI, speech, quoted at
https://rlo.acton.org/archives/32131-the-nobility-and-greatness-of-work.html

- Chesterton, G. K. *Three Works on Distributism*.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2009.

- Leo XIII, *Rerum Novarum*, 1891.
(Downloaded from: http://w2.vatican.va/content/leo-xiii/en/encyclicals/documents/hf_l-xiii_enc_15051891_rerum-novarum.html)

