**Giovanni Gentile and the "Humanism of Labor"**

Spartaco Pupo

(University of Calabria)

ABSTRACT

Considered by some to be the most prominent Italian philosopher of the
twentieth century, Giovanni Gentile (1875-1944) organically fulfilled
the "humanism of labor" in his work-testament, *Genesis and Structure of
Society* (published posthumously in 1946). Gentile believed that the
modern world had come to understand the spiritual value of labor in the
same way that he had understood the spiritual value of culture. He
recognized the "sense" of intellectual and manual labor as having a
methodological and crucial significance because of its unbreakable
connection to the "Absolute Spirit," which enables understanding of the
formative significance of working action. Gentile's thesis emphasizes
the significance of the interaction between "intellectuals" and
"workers" in the framework of human values, identifying a real union of
labor and culture.

*The international misfortune*

The final and little-known phase of Giovanni Gentile's intellectual
work, considered by many to be the finest Italian philosopher of the
twentieth century, is realized in the organic concept of "humanism of
labour." This is a historicist, philosophical, and religious humanism
that prosecutes and defends classical humanism while also interpreting
the most prominent examples of contemporaneity.

This doctrine is especially unknown in the English-speaking world,
where, moreover, only three of Gentile's publications translated into
English exist to date: *Teoria generale dello spirito come atto puro*
(1916), dating back to1922[^1] and commissioned by Gentile's
contemporary, the great British philosopher Herbert Wildon Carr; *Genesi
e struttura della societ√†* (1943), dated 1966[^2] by the laudable
initiative of Henry Silton Harris, who was the author, by his admission,
of "a rescue operation"[^3] of the Italian philosopher; and *Origini e
dottrina del fascismo* (1929), brought to print in 2002 by professor
James A. Gregor.[^4]

Gentile's "misfortune" in the Anglo-American area, moreover, is probably
to be attributed to the initiative of Guido De Ruggero, who, after
having long been inspired by Gentile's philosophy, was pleased to let
the international academic world know, in an article in English, that
his master's thought was enclosed "in one or more formulae, which he is
wont to repeat and to amplify and vary with invincible monotony," thus
promoting "an abstruse and tiresome theology," a "religious oratory,
full of unction and false rhetorical emotion".[^5] Yet De Ruggiero had
been the only one to follow Gentile in his courageous affirmation of the
identity of thought and action, because to think is to act, and to act
is to think, a maxim with which Gentile justified his "actualism" as a
doctrine not so much of the identity between philosophy and history,
emulated moreover by Benedetto Croce, as of the immanence of philosophy
in life. De Ruggiero's failure to develop an accomplished philosophical
system for political reasons inspired his strong bitterness towards
Gentile.[^6]

Finally, despite being nine years younger than the other great figure in
the rebirth of idealism in Italy, Croce, whose international fame
completely eclipsed his own, Gentile did not inspire organic and
noteworthy monographic studies abroad on his political thought, except
those of the aforementioned Harris and Gregor.[^7] This indifference, as
is well known, is primarily due to two factors: Gentile's failure to
systematically expound his doctrine and its consequences because he was
not given the time; and his association with fascism, of which he was an
ardent supporter from 1923 until his death, even though Gentile's entire
intellectual production had already been organically copied well before
his affiliation with fascism, as evidenced by the chronology of his main
works.

***Beyond individualism and collectivism***

*Humanism of Labor is the title of the seventh paragraph of Chapter XI
(History)* in his work *Genesis and Structure of Society*, written on
the spur of the moment in the summer of 1943 and published two years
after his bloody death on 15 April 1944 in Florence at the hands of
communist partisans who did not forgive him for being the "philosopher
of fascism," which was in the process of dissolving at that time.
Gentile concludes his speculative trip with this text of "practical
philosophy," as the subtitle puts it, though not without tying it into a
rigorous theoretical and logical investigation. Gentile leaves us with
his "spiritual testament," as this work has been properly dubbed.

It is possible to argue that this final work, which is of the utmost
ethical and pedagogical importance, represents the organic synthesis of
Gentile's philosophical-political philosophy. The idea of a society *in
interiore homine*, which was first introduced in *I fondamenti della
filosofia del diritto* (1916) but had not yet gained centrality, serves
as its fundamental basis. For Gentile, this notion should be interpreted
as a dialectical overcoming of individualism and collectivism, which
were both based on a naturalistic mindset drawn from the Enlightenment
that was unable to recognize the human being in the historical
concreteness of his life as a person, society, and state---that is, the
three forms in which the discourse found in the pages of *Genesis and
Structure of Society* is expressed.

For Gentile, a human person is ultimately an object of mind, not a
natural entity, but rather "thought" in and of itself. It is not an
abstract, lifeless mind, but rather a cognition identified in concrete
action---the historical application of thought---in which the
"responsibility" that endows the subject with special, one-of-a-kind
human value is exercised. The human being "exists as a particular
person, but not as one among others", as a "unique, and therefore
infinite and universal."[^8] It is not the numerical and mechanical
entity of atomistic and materialistic interpretations, but the "Ego" as
freedom and value, with which it becomes an active part of society and
"speaks and sings, thinks and feels, desires and wills, and in general
constitutes its own reality through its continual activity."[^9] In
other words, the individual is not a human being in general, who has
never lived; rather, he is the true person, who is, for example, each of
us gathered here: the historical person, who exists and is reality. But
he is above all individuality in sociality, for it is in sociality that
he abandons the area of natural immediacy and proclaims himself as
spirituality and freedom, knowledge and will, a language shared by all
men. Human history is the history of thought in action, in which each
person acts and contributes to the realization of good, in one word,
*works*. The universality of mankind, Gentile maintains, is conquest,
which is achieved through self-consciousness: "For, as we shall never
tire of repeating, the consciousness of self is not an immediate
attribute of the spirit but the product of its eternal labor---the bread
that is earned only in the sweat of the brow."[^10] Humans moulds their
personalities into constancies of will both internally and via their
reciprocal relationships with other persons, with whom they identify.
Gentile writes: "At the root of the *I* there is a *We*. The community
to which an individual belongs is the basis of his spiritual existence;
it speaks through his mouth, feels with his heart, and thinks with his
brain."[^11]

To put it succinctly, the Gentile community of belonging stands for both
the rejection of atomistic and materialistic collectivism and the
release from the constraints of empirical individuality inherent in
naturalistic individualism. In the "dialectical linking of *alter* with
*ipse*," the *societas in interiore homine* is ultimately an expression
of the substantive unity between mankind, which exists before their
differences and "infinite forms."[^12]

*The ethical nature of the State*

This need for humanistic synthesis also serves as the foundation for
Gentile's doctrine of the State, which was developed during the
actualistic arrangement and is given a thorough and articulate treatment
in *Genesis and Structure of Society*, emphasizing the institutional
structures' authentically renewed nature. "In its spiritual essence the
State exists always and yet it never exists", argues Gentile.
Consequently, it cannot be described by immanence in its purest form or,
at the very least, by immanence that is the straightforward opposite of
transcendence: "Its ideal is always in advance of its present mode of
existence; like every spiritual value, it has life because it is
sensible of its own true self above and beyond its present self, as an
ideal to be reached, a transcendent reality. This transcendence is the
reason why it belongs to the world of liberty."[^13]

The "universal common aspect of the will," the "concrete and actual
expression" of the will shielded from the empirical aspects appropriate
to naturalistic interpretations, is how Gentile views the State. The
State's history is linked to human history when it comes to its
independence, universality, and spiritual unity. Gentile argues against
the idea of "nationality" which holds that a nation is inherently
entitled to unity and autonomy: "It is not nationality that creates the
State, but the State which creates nationality, by setting the seal of
actual existence on it. It is through the *conquest* of unity and
independence that the nation gives proof of its political will, and
establishes its existence as a State."[^14]

The State is not an abstract concept; rather, it is an idea of concrete
reality, real to the extent that it functions in reality, and it serves
a unifying and moralizing role in the lives of individuals and groups of
individuals, rather than being limited to serving as an administrative
tool for sector-specific interests. The State is not *among* individuals
but rather "in that unity of particular and universal which constitutes
is individuality;"[^15] rather it is the actual and concrete reality,
both universal and particular, social and individual, of the human
being, the protagonist of historical becoming. The State is not an
entity opposed to or superimposed upon individuals, but rather the
universal consciousness of individuals, united by the awareness of their
mutual and unbreakable unity.

The State is entitled to the same morality and tangible actuality of the
individual's will as the latter because both are "ethical" in the same
sense that people are. It cannot disregard religion because it is
fundamental to people's morality and their souls. Gentile opposes both
the notion of the confessional state and the secular state---that is,
the uninformed and helpless secular state---in its narrower sense of
secularism. In response to these proposals, Gentile rejects the notion
that the State should not take an active role in the advancement of
religion, protect and promote religious education, and support national
religion because it recognizes that religion "constitutes the moral
earnestness of every man" and has a significant impact on "every aspect
of his activity (scientific, artistic, etc.)."[^16]

This fundamentally moral character allows the State to devotedly carry
out its educational purpose through a tangible program that not only
tackles today's issues but also looks toward the future. Thus, every
individual honors the past, navigates the present, intentionally plans
the future, and behaves accordingly. Therefore, the State is a champion
of genuine progress, personal development, and societal
advancement---all of which are only possible via the methodical
application of critical inquiry. Thus, the statesman's "philosophy:" "In
fact, there is no statesman who has not, at least *in nuce*, a
philosophy of his own."[^17] Since philosophy is "the leaven, the very
soul of life,"[^18] it is in the air one breathes and is therefore vital
to the State's ethical existence. Without philosophy, there could be no
State, religion, art, science, and ethics.

***Unitarianism and ethicality of labor***

The humanism of labor, which was paved over by the social upheavals of
the 19^th^ century but whose "political concreteness" is a product of
the 20^th^, is announced by Gentile in light of this vision, which holds
that man is the active subject of history and the responsible creator of
society and the State as a spiritual community. From this perspective,
all of the manifestations of man's productive activity are included in
the "culture" proper to artistic, literary, and philosophical humanism,
which is defined as knowledge that forms man by clearing and enlarging
the consciousness that every man must have of himself, and therefore by
exercising reflection on the content of his thought and his own
character. In other words, the humanism of culture, which periodically
made an appearance till reaching its pinnacle during the Renaissance, is
the unalienable basis of the new humanism since it promotes the shared
awareness of "universal dignity of humanity."[^19]

The humanistic cultural movement that spread across Europe in the
fourteenth and sixteenth centuries, originating in Italy, is supported
by a more comprehensive exaltation of labor, which is interpreted as a
cohesive manifestation of the diverse intellectual, planning, and
creative capacities inherent to humanity. Gentile is conscious that the
modern and current world has grafted new social and political structures
on top of the humanistic legacy, which has fostered an increasingly
complex labor problem. The utilitarianism and agnosticism are inherent
to the administrative State and the abstract person cannot provide a
solution to the complexity and urgency of the work environment. The
worker, as it is, with its interests differentiated according to the
natural categories that are gradually being constituted, is the State of
today and the State of the future, notes Gentile. By default, the
citizen is the actual, flesh-and-blood individual who works and is
valued according to his or her labor, not the abstract human being or a
member of the ruling class. Since labor has a true value, "a man's worth
is to be measured according to the quantity and quality of his
work."[^20]

The foundation of Gentile humanism of labor is the idea of the unified
nature of labor, which, in opposition to Croce's dialectic of "distinct
concepts,"[^21] subdues any intellectualistic division between labor and
culture or between manual and intellectual labor. For Gentile, a person
works by deploying "that same activity of thought which forever sets and
solves the problems in which his actual existence is continually knotted
and untied in the world of art, literature, scholarship, or
philosophy."[^22] The various forms of labor are not intrinsically
different from one another; rather, the peculiar interests of the
numerous productive categories in modern society, which are inclined to
support an ever-growing variety of labor in its many specializations,
give rise to differences between them. The development of the "system of
civil society which is the raw matter of the State," however, is
motivated by a common interest that unites them all. This is an
expression of a differentiated will operating "into an organic system,
in which every individual by willing himself wills the system."[^23]

Furthermore, there is a growing societal awareness of the necessity to
plan and manage the diverse labor activities that together comprise what
Italy called the "corporative" State during the 1930s. The latter tends
to perfect all those artificial forms, responding to mere conventional
principles rather than to the needs and tendencies of individuals,
according to their actual interests. This is because it accords equal
importance to all labor representations and permits them to ascend to
the highest managerial responsibilities and powers of the State (both
legislative and executive).

For Gentile, parties and parliaments in liberal-inspired States are
these artificial forms, each of which sought to educate the person in a
political sense and public affairs. Since the corporative State upholds
the actual decisions made by the people to whom freedom is attributed,
unless demonstrated otherwise, it is the State of freedom in the truest
sense of the word due to the unique predominance of labor in all of its
expressions. In this sense, Gentile contends that freedom fails to
fulfil its potential and runs the risk of being a hoax if it is bestowed
upon an intangible and non-existent people rather than the people as it
truly is. Thus, the "free State" is not the one that liberals understand
in an abstract way as an institution defending the rights of an
ostensibly equal and free individual; rather, it is, in fact, "the state
of the man who works," which recognizes the "moral and economic essence
of labor" and refuses to turn its back "on the living individual in
pursuit of a man of straw."[^24]

If labor is seen by liberalism as a commodity, toil, and sweat, and by
communism as alienation, then it is seen by Gentile as a civilization, a
means of self-education, a duty to the society, and a sincere love of
country. For Gentile, work that is both guided and supported by culture
is the concrete affirmation of man's freedom. This is because, just as
genuine culture cannot exist without the individual efforts of those who
fight to establish and expand it, so too does work have greater validity
and efficacy the more it is individualistic and the more it considers
the material and spiritual needs of the community, which it serves to
meet in harmony with the most disparate work performances.

Gentile can claim that organized civil society cannot be careless toward
him because culture and employment are inseparable. The promotion of
culture in the pedagogical sense---that is, assisting individuals in
realizing the importance of the values found in the history of previous
generations to encourage them to adopt them and pass them on to future
generations---is, in fact, one of the most significant tasks he gives to
civil society that is firmly organized in the state. As a result, one of
the pillars of classical humanism is the Gentile's realization of the
fundamental "ethicality" of labor, which is consistent with the
ethicality of culture. All work, from the most basic practical activity
to the highest form of theoretical speculation, is ethically based, and
this allows us to fully comprehend the proposal for a new formulation of
the relationship between the individual and the State, as well as
between the individual and society, going beyond the deceptive
Enlightenment suggestions that gave rise to the opposing ideologies of
Marxist collectivism and liberal individualism.

Gentile is adamantly opposed to the Enlightenment idea of man as
self-sufficient and inherently free, viewing it as a path toward a
radical naturalistic atomism that reduces society to a "mechanical
aggregate of units independent of each other and irrelative," leading to
the collapse of both individual "functionality" and all value. The
Enlightenment's establishment of intellectual, moral, and political
self-sufficiency as a necessary condition for human dignity and pleasure
is fake for Gentile since it posits the coexistence of men in a society
that is thought to be merely a multitude that happens to converge by
accident. To avoid creating "a shadow that looms over the field of
politics and makes it sterile," it is necessary to overcome any covert
dualistic opposition between a sociality as such and the individuality
of the individual, who is "the fulcrum of liberty in liberalism, and the
absolute principle of liberty in individualism."[^25] Instead, a
concretely unified vision of social reality must be used, as it is the
vivid and real expression of true human freedom and is not that stratum
of liberal individualism but rather a quality of every individual in
concrete, "the people;" "an Italian can only be free insofar as the
Italian people is free; if his people is enslaved, he can only be a
slave."[^26]

Thus, the kind of freedom that has been promoted by the agnostic,
relativist, and materialist Enlightenment and its successors over the
past two centuries is not real freedom; rather, it stems from an
unrealistic conception of society as a multitude that exists outside of
the individual, which the individual opposes because he feels
constrained by it. Ultimately, this vision was responsible for the
eventual development of the "third state," which was unable to achieve
universal freedom. It also cleared the way for the rise of socialism and
communism, which were movements that opposed worker exploitation and
marginalization.

Contrary to the Enlightenment's naturalistic interpretation, Gentile
proposes the creation of a hierarchy of values in which *homo faber* and
*homo sapiens* discover their reciprocal reversal, and in which
authority and freedom, right and duty, find a historical synthesis that
honors the mechanistic and deterministic perspective that gave rise to
both Marxist-inspired collectivism and liberal-inspired individualism.

*The modern humanist viewpoint*

If Gentile's humanism of labor viewpoint cannot be credited with
advancing political theory or leading to tangible accomplishments eighty
years after his passing, then it also cannot be credited with being
disproved or contradicted by alternative theoretical positions. Because
of the incapacity and stubbornness of people and governments, the debate
between individuality and collectivism has persisted up to this point,
both theoretically and practically. So much so that the materialism born
from the Enlightenment still splits into its two classic forms.

According to Gentile's forecast, the humanism of labor aims to bring
tradition and development together in the dialectical coherence of the
two concepts, which are believed to be incompatible and irreconcilable
yet are rooted in the spirit's eternal existence. First and foremost,
its novelty lies in substituting the atomistic, one-sided understanding
of man and society with a vision that encompasses the integrity of
spirit and matter, universal and particular, singularity and
multiplicity; second, it reveals work as an explanation of all human
activity, both theoretical and practical, that is put to the service of
each person's freedom, understood both individually and communally,
starting with the family and extending to the city, the nation, and
humanity as a whole; third, in the request to launch an extensive
educational program covering the entirety of human history and the
lineage of generations, grounded in a primarily spiritualistic
understanding of human reality and a successful revitalization of social
norms oriented toward the new humanism, realised in tangible historical
forms and thus in social and political institutions; lastly, in the
possibility of ensuring the protection of individuals' natural rights,
freeing them from selfishness and atomism and bringing them into
awareness of their own personalities in respect of others', as well as
in mutual and solidarity-based cooperation subordinate to the
achievement of community interest. The fourth and final point is the
recompositing of the dialectical unity of human history interrupted by
the Enlightenment climate tending to subvert tradition as a result of a
radical hostility to inherited institutions and the past.

Gentile aims to assert the institutional forms and practical contents of
social justice to supplement commutative and distributive fairness,
which is its premise, as opposed to the mere notion of social justice,
which is currently very popular in liberal-socialist societies. The tool
is the ethical, legal, and financial involvement of employees in the
collective management of businesses, whether they are public or private,
and it translates into practice the standards of professional competence
in a civil society that are established and structured through equitable
attitudinal selection.

While humanism of labor acknowledges the qualities included in science
and technology, it rejects the idea that these fields are the source of
scientistic and technicist errors that threaten the organic unity
between thought and action, which is the central objective of the
humanistic worldview. Naturalism, not humanism, is the source of
scientism and technicism. They draw attention to how human knowledge is
fragmenting into a more intricate web of specialized and in-depth
research, endangering the unity of knowledge embodied by the
transcendent and metaphysical aspect of human existence.

***Concluding remarks***

The humanism of labor is the product of a mind devoted to comprehending
the human being in his totality, in his union between freedom and
spirituality, which he strives for during his personal life but which is
inextricably linked to the activities of his society. Gentile's
viewpoint aims to overthrow the naturalistic and materialistic practices
that still exist in modern culture and institutional forms, which are
exemplified by both neo-collectivist doctrines and praxis and unbridled
individualism. Instead, Gentile proposes a humanistic conception of
reality that is precisely capable of establishing a lasting social
justice that follows from the moral and legal recognition of work in all
of its manifestations within a community of solidarity that is based on
the tangible affirmation of each person's rights and obligations.

As effective solidarity among men in an essentially ethical synthesis,
the new order of labor humanism is that of justice, insofar as it
fosters the ensuing acknowledgement of a true hierarchy of values of
man, who is both *sapiens* and *faber*. It is feasible to fight both any
atomistic and mechanistic conception of man and his history, as well as
the levelling of intelligence and the ensuing degradation of the human
person's potentialities and freedoms, with such a synthesis.

Authority and freedom, responsibility and right, tradition and progress
are all harmonized in this organic and cohesive vision of man in a
historical and ethical synthesis that rejects any individualistic and
collectivistic hardening, even if it results from a naturalistic and
deterministic conception of man and history. Furthermore, the historical
record seems to confirm humanity's profound religious yearning for
harmony and veracity: faith is inherent to the human spirit, which rises
above itself to eternity and the absolute, escaping the shackles of
matter.

The humanism of labor, which offers the man of today and tomorrow new,
unrestricted vistas, can be accessed by the consciousness of our day,
which is imprisoned in consumerism and technicism. However, this will
require him to permanently break free from the sectarianism that is
prevalent even in many academic circles and beyond.

[^1]: G. Gentile, *The Theory of Mind as Pure Act*, trans. H. W. Carr
    (London: Macmillan and Co., 1922).

[^2]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, trans. H. S.
    Harris (Urbana and London: University of Illinois Press, 1966).

[^3]: H. S. Harris, *Preface*, in *The Social Philosophy of Giovanni
    Gentile*, viii.

[^4]: G. Gentile, *Origins and Doctrine of Fascism*, trans. A. J. Gregor
    (New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 2002).

[^5]: See Guido de Ruggiero, "Main Currents of Contemporary Philosophy
    in Italy," trans. C. M. Allen, *Philosophy* 1, no. 3 (1926): 327.

[^6]: See C. Gily Reda, *Guido de Ruggiero. Un ritratto filosofico*
    (Napoli: Societ√† Editrice Napoletana, 1981).

[^7]: A. J. Gregor, *Giovanni Gentile*:¬†*Philosopher of Fascism* (New
    Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 2001).

[^8]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 86.

[^9]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 81.

[^10]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 87.

[^11]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 82.

[^12]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 107.

[^13]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 167.

[^14]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 121-122.

[^15]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 130.

[^16]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 153.

[^17]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 158.

[^18]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 161.

[^19]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 171.

[^20]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 172.

[^21]:  See B. Croce, *A Croce Reader: Aesthetics, Philosophy, History, and Literary Criticism*, trans. M. Verdicchio (Toronto-Buffalo-London: University of Toronto Press, 2017), 27-30.
    =================================================================================================================================================================================

[^22]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 171.

[^23]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 173.

[^24]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 173.

[^25]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 169.

[^26]: G. Gentile, *Genesis and Structure of Society*, 130.
