William Lombardo

July 16, 2024

Boston College

<lombarwb@bc.edu>

Hegel on Labor

Hegel's daunting complexity and abstraction can obscure that
labor---engagement with the physical, material world---plays a critical
role in the development of the self-conscious individual and of the
rational state. Indeed, as vociferous a critic as Marx observes (albeit
critically) in the *1844 Manuscripts* that Hegel "grasps labor as the
essence of man." Without embracing Marx's totalizing claim, this chapter
aims to highlight the importance of labor to Hegelian philosophy by
focusing on two major texts. This task requires treating labor's crucial
but often underappreciated role in the *Phenomenology of Spirit* before
turning to some more familiar passages on labor in the *Philosophy of
Right.*[^1] The chapter will proceed in the following manner. We will
first examine the *Phenomenology* to see how labor functions as a
foundation for human self-consciousness before proceeding to an analysis
of its role in the mature political philosophy of the *Philosophy of
Right*. There, we shall see Hegel's analysis of labor both embedded in
civil society and under threat from the market.

Alongside its discussion of labor's role in these two major works of
Hegel, this chapter aims to support another claim, namely that Hegel's
thoughts on labor are of enduring, and not merely historical, interest.
To that end, the chapter will conclude with brief remarks on how Hegel
provides valuable material for thinking through the automation of labor,
now perhaps aided by artificial intelligence. While Hegel is light on
institutional solutions to such issues---and, indeed, this pessimism is
an important part of his thinking around these questions---he suggests
that a post-laboring humanity would be unworthy of the name.

*Labor in The Phenomenology of Spirit*

The *Phenomenology of Spirit* is an account of consciousness's
self-education, from its simplest, unmediated, natural form to complex,
mediated Absolute Knowing that has earned for itself the name of science
(*Wissenschaft*). The work sets out to answer what consciousness can
know and how consciousness can be sure of its knowing. To that end,
consciousness proceeds through a series of necessary, logically
predetermined shapes. These shapes increase in sophistication and
complexity, but they all share in the following structure of the
opposition of consciousness (see *PG* §81-87; 9:58-61): briefly put,
each shape of consciousness is defined by two relations. The first is
that of consciousness and the object it gives itself; there is some
object that consciousness takes to be essential, the cognizing of which
would represent knowledge. The second is that consciousness gives itself
the standard by which it can recognize knowing as knowing. Consciousness
proceeds from one shape to another when the mode of knowing it sets for
itself fails to provide it with knowledge of the object it takes to be
essential. In light of this failure, consciousness revises both its
object and its mode of knowing. This series of revisions---what Hegel
will call "determinate negations"---propels consciousness's journey.

Labor appears in the second major shape of consciousness,
self-consciousness (Chapter IV), and it has the specific function of
holding desire in check. In self-consciousness, consciousness takes
itself as its object; what is essential is that it know itself.
Self-consciousness appears confronted by an external world, and yet the
appearance of a freestanding, external world threatens
self-consciousness's claim to essentiality. It must therefore convert
what is alien to it into a part of itself. It does this by consuming,
appropriating, sublating (*aufheben*) the external world.
Self-consciousness's initial relation to the external world is therefore
one of ravenous, frantic consumption. As Hegel succinctly puts it,
"self-consciousness is desire as such (*Begierde überhaupt*)" (§167;
9:104). In its simplest form, self-consciousness is characterized by its
desire for all things. There is no real limit to self-consciousness's
desire, because self-conscious desire arises out of a need for constant
confirmation of its own essentiality. The desire is not indexed to
biological need; there is no point of satiety for the desiring
self-consciousness.

This poses a problem for self-consciousness, since it cannot in fact
negate the entirety of the external world. It "constantly re-engenders
the object of its desire." Self-consciousness cannot just sublate
anything lest it be trapped in the infinitude of its own desire. It
must, rather, sublate something else essential, namely another
self-consciousness: "self-consciousness finds its satisfaction only in
another self-consciousness." It finds satisfaction only as a "recognized
being" (§175; 9:108) In the duplication of self-consciousnesses,
therefore, each strives to establish himself as the essential being, and
they engage in a life and death struggle. This is the beginning of the
famous dialectic of master and servant (*Herr*/*Knecht*). The victor in
the struggle assumes the role of master and sets the vanquished, the
servant, to work on the external world. The former thus receives the
recognition of the latter and no longer has to tarry with the
inessential external world; he satisfies his desire while the servant
labors on the inessential.

Of course, the master's expectations are subverted, as the recognition
of his essentiality is bound up in the self-consciousness of the
servant. The master passes from the shape, and the servant becomes the
self-consciousness which proceeds to successive shapes. The servile
consciousness is "forced back into itself \[and\] will take the inward
turn (*in sich gehen*)" (§193; 9:114), gaining for himself a "mind of
his own" (§196; 9:115), the depth and reflexivity we associate with
self-consciousness. Hegel explains that this is for two reasons. First,
it is because of the servant's brush with death, in the face of which
"all stable existence becomes absolutely fluid, \[which\] is the simple
essence of self-consciousness" (§194; 9:114). Second, and more important
for our purposes, it is because the servant *labors*, which
distinguishes him from the master who never overcomes the desire that
constitutes his initial relationship with the external world.

During his labor for the master, "the aspect of the non-essential
relation to the thing seemed to fall to the lot of the servant, as the
thing there retained its self-sufficiency (*Selbständigkeit*) " (§195;
9:114-5). The master, on the other hand, "reserved to itself the pure
negating of the object," that is, its consumption (ibid). And for this
reason, the master's "satisfaction is itself only a vanishing, for it
lacks the *objective* aspect, or *stable existence.*" The master
replicates the problem of desire in general, namely that it is boundless
and incapable of discriminating between objects. It is the servant who,
in his servitude, must take a different stance toward the object of the
master's desire. For the servant labors on the external world without
the expectation that he will thereby consummate his desire.[^2] On the
contrary, through his labor the servant maintains an enduring distance
between himself and the object of its labor. Labor is thus, Hegel says,
"desire held in check, it is vanishing *staved off*, or: work
*cultivates and educates* (*Arbeit bildet*)."

This latter claim requires further elucidation, since if it is clear
that laboring on an object requires suppressing one's desire to consume
that object, we must do further work to see how it thereby cultivates.
The solution thus comes by way of seeing how permanency in the object of
labor engenders a similar permanency in the laboring subject. Recall
that the servant appears initially as an inessential consciousness to
himself. Because he now labors on an object, the servile consciousness
deals with an object that "endures" and that endures precisely because
of "the negative mediating middle, this formative *doing* (*formirende
Thun*)," namely labor (ibid). In the process of giving permanence to its
object, the servile consciousness likewise "enters into the element of
lasting (*Element des Bleibens*)." He "comes to an intuition of
self-sufficient being *as its own self*" (ibid). By laboring on an
external object and giving form to an object that endures, the subject
comes to realize that he himself also endures, for his own permanence is
necessary to give form to the object. What is more, he sees himself
"externalized" in a free-standing object, as Oran Moked's discussion of
this movement makes clear.[^3] Moked clarifies that the servant
recognizes the object as a testament to his labor, as something whose
way of being results from his investment and nobody else's.[^4] Labor,
as the mediating middle between subject and external object, mediates
two enduring terms. The servile consciousness becomes an enduring,
existing being *for itself.*

We are now in a better position to understand how labor educates and
cultivates the subject. In short, it helps to turn the subject into a
temporally extended one of explicit and constant concern to himself.
This is the kind of subject who is available for self-cultivation, who
can make of himself an enduring project. As we have seen above, the
*Phenomenology* follows the development and cultivation of
consciousness, from natural consciousness to spirit to Absolute Knowing.
This process ultimately demands that consciousness be an object capable
of development---a subject with permanence.

Within the *Phenomenology*, therefore, labor plays a crucial role not
only in driving consciousness forward to a higher stage but also in
establishing a precondition for all later development. Within the
movement just outlined, however, Hegel is also making claims about labor
as such. It is labor, that is, that raises self-consciousness out of the
condition of pure desire. The modality of uncultivated
self-consciousness, according to Hegel, is unceasing desire, and absent
labor self-conscious human beings would be caught in this bad
infinitude. Note that this is not an historic claim. Hegel's argument is
not that there was some prehistoric time during which humans consumed
without restriction until one of them "discovered" labor and thereby
tamed his own desire. Nor is this dialectic restricted to feudalism and
its dissolution. Insofar as the *Phenomenology*'s argument is logical
and not historical, it examines the logical components of human
self-consciousness as such. On this view, humans are always already
laboring beings, and this is why they are capable of assuming a distance
from and control over their desire and of undertaking projects to
cultivate both the external world and themselves. It does not overstate
things to claim that in the *Phenomenology* labor is a core,
constitutive element of human self-consciousness. In the absence of
labor, a possibility we will consider in the next section, we can expect
not only impoverishment and alienation---though these are certainly
symptoms---but also the unraveling of self-consciousness altogether.

*The Philosophy of Right: Labor in the Market*

In the *Philosophy of Right*, labor comes to be situated within a
community and a market. The work's goal is to detail the development
through which the will comes to take "freedom as its object" (*PR* §27;
14:44). In its fullest development, freedom "becomes the rational system
of the spirit itself and...becomes immediate actuality" (ibid). Freedom
therefore requires the development of political institutions in which
the rational mind recognizes that it enjoys its freedom, and these are
the institutions among which modern laborers find themselves. The most
developed form of objective freedom for Hegel exists in the sphere
commonly translated as "ethical life" (*Sittlichkeit*), within which the
state stands as freedom's highest expression. Yet the state holds
together the logically prior moments of civil society, which will be our
focus in this section. For civil society (*bürgerliche Gesellschaft*) is
the site of the market and the realm of labor. Yet although civil
society is the site of a relatively developed form of freedom, Hegel
nonetheless argues that labor in a modern, market economy is beset by
threats from both the division of labor and the market itself. At their
worst, these threats lead to the creation of a laborless class excluded
from civil society altogether.

Civil society comprises two principles. The first is the "particular
person, as a totality of needs and a mixture of natural necessity and
arbitrariness (*Willkühr*)." The second is "the form of universality"
according to which each "particular person stands essentially in
relation to other similar particulars, and their relation is such that
each asserts itself and gains satisfaction through the others" (§182;
14:160). Civil society is rational because the satisfaction of each
individual's biological needs and subjective freedom ("arbitrariness")
tends toward the satisfaction of all others', while the universal
guarantees the satisfaction of the particular. What Hegel comes to call
a "dialectical movement (*dialektische Bewegung*)" (§199; 14:169) is the
agentless coordination of individual arbitrariness into a system that
(potentially) satisfies the needs of all. This ought to evoke Smith's
invisible hand, and indeed Hegel attributes his own understanding of
political economy, which "finds the laws underlying a mass of contingent
occurrences," to "Smith, Ricardo, and Say."[^5] The system of needs
must, however, achieve this point of universal coordination. The
universal satisfaction of needs must exist in actuality.

Labor connects these two principles. Hegel defines labor as "the
mediation whereby appropriate and particularized means are acquired and
prepared for similarly particularized needs" (§196: 14:168). With
respect to its application, labor "specifically applies to these
numerous ends the material which is immediately provided by nature"
(ibid). It is the "process of formation," the improving of natural
materials and readying them for consumption, that "gives the means
\[i.e., the particular forms of labor\] their value and
appropriateness." Human beings consume "human effort," and not only raw
material. The value of labor, therefore, is not exclusively the
compensation paid to the producer. Although in civil society
remuneration for labor is the means by which an individual satisfies his
own needs, there is a function of labor anterior to its place in a
market economy. According to Hegel, "there are few immediate materials
which do not need to be processed," and so "it is by the sweat and labor
of human beings that man obtains the means to satisfy his needs"
(§196A). Hegel dismisses Rousseau's notion of an original, harmonious
equilibrium between human beings and their environment that obviated the
need for laboring on nature. Rather, we have always had to transform
what is naturally available into something fit for human consumption.
This is but a restatement of the conclusion above that humans are always
already laboring animals.

Modern markets, however, produce far more than is needed to satisfy the
biological needs of consumers. Hegel thus introduces another component
of the system of needs, "social needs," which represent both the
overcoming of natural need and the free rein of "inner contingency" and
"arbitrariness" (§194; 14:167). These are the desires molded by fashion
and taste, and their specification depends on the individual's
subjective whims. Even if, like food and clothing, they may correspond
to biological needs, they can be satisfied by any number of goods. From
this, Hegel concludes that the "social condition" tends toward "an
indeterminate multiplication and specification of needs, means, and
pleasures---i.e., luxury---a tendency which...has no limits *(Grenzen*)"
(§195; 14:167-8). Labor is just as crucial for facilitating an economy
of opinion as for producing the rudiments of life, and the limitlessness
of these needs spawns both a division of labor and a tendency toward
overproduction.

The diversification of needs leads to a diversification of forms of
labor, while within the production of a single commodity, labor becomes
increasingly particularized. Hegel, that is, introduces the division of
labor as a consequence of the system of needs and its satisfaction. On
one hand, this is expected and even beneficial, as the individual "by a
process of self-determination, makes himself a member of one of the
moments of civil society" (§207). The laborer gains a concrete public
existence by choosing what role he will play in civil society. On the
other hand, however, through division, labor becomes "simpler," "so that
\[the Individual's\] skill (*Geschicklichkeit*) at his abstract work
becomes greater, as does the volume of his output (*Productionen*)"
(§198; 14:169). The notion of abstraction here means that each laborer's
contribution resembles less and less the product that goes to market. To
borrow Adam Smith's famous example, of which Hegel made ample use in his
lectures, each pin factory laborer produces ever more minute components
of the pin.[^6]

From this division comes astronomical increases in productivity, yet
this simplification is replete with its own dangers: "the abstraction of
production makes work increasingly mechanical, so that the human being
is able to step aside and let a machine take his place" (ibid).[^7] The
obvious implication of this remark---that simple, repetitive tasks are
easier to mechanize---obscures a more ominous one, namely that the
division of labor minimizes the distance between human beings and
machines by making the former more like the latter.[^8] Here is Hegel's
clearest indication that certain *kinds* of labor are corrosive of the
laborer's humanity. However much factory work entails the discipline of
desire, it prevents the worker from ascending beyond such
discipline.[^9] These remarks are the end of Hegel's formal discussion
of the nature of labor, and they leave the reader expecting a sublation
(*Aufhebung*) of this limitation, some higher reconciliation wherein the
threat of mechanization is overcome. Such a development never arrives,
however. The full development of *Sittlichkeit*, its fullest expression
in the state, never neatly absorbs this externality from the division of
labor.

Mechanization is not the only externality in the Hegelian labor market.
Unlike in the classical model, in which a labor market equilibrium
results if there is free competition among employers, Hegel posits that
industrial market economies will produce a class of people to whom the
opportunity for work is denied. Civil society's "own distinct resources
are not sufficient...to prevent an excess of poverty and the formation
of a rabble \[*Pöbel*\]" (§245; 14:194). According to Hegel, a general
equilibrium between supply and demand is unlikely to emerge across the
entire economy, even if it obtains in discrete markets. Rather, the
market will always tend toward overproduction and, as resources shift,
the resulting contraction will wipe out far more jobs than are required
for full productivity (ibid). The result is a permanent population of
the unemployed for whom there are no jobs or who always lack the skills
for one.[^10] Hegel refuses to idealize labor markets; the threat of
unemployment, delivered by the impersonal market, hangs over the heads
of all industrial laborers. Nor are laborers able simply to change
careers. As Lisa Herzog has emphasized, the Hegelian laborer's identity
is in part constituted by an act of subjective freedom, a choice of
career (§206; 14:173).[^11]

Hegel does not, however, propose reforming the labor market as a way of
overcoming this; there are only means of amelioration, of ensuring that
"particular welfare (*besondere Wohl*) should be treated as a right and
duly actualized" (§230; 14:189) or of the state taking over the (only
ever temporary) role as employer (.[^12] But the institutions necessary
for reducing the poverty of those denied work are less interesting for
our purposes than Hegel's description of the "rabble," that laborless
class inhabiting the "lowest level of subsistence" in a given society
(§244 and addition; 14:194). Taking a closer look at the rabble will
enable us to conclude this section by unifying some of Hegel's other,
disparate observations about modern labor.

The impoverishment of the rabble leads to the loss of the "feeling of
right, integrity, and honor which comes from supporting oneself by one's
activity and work" (ibid.). They are characterized by their "inward
rebellion against the rich, against society, the government, etc." Over
the course of time, "dependent on contingency" for the satisfaction of
their needs, they grow "frivolous and lazy." We can see here that the
rabble is deficient in two respects. First, they have lost their
self-sufficiency and sense of earning their portion of the common
resource. They have faded from civil society and thereby lost their
status as citizens. They no longer have a public presence and, indeed,
they reject the notion that the community or the state has any claim on
their allegiance. Not appearing in public, therefore, they are denied
the recognition for which civil society is supposed to be the site
(§207; 14:173-4). Beyond the realm of intersubjective recognition,
however, they are also left out of the institutional scheme whereby
citizens are organized into bodies. They neither belong to an
estate---and a person "with no estate is merely a private person and
does not possess actual universality" (§207A)---nor to a corporation
(§255; 14:199). While their biological needs may be fulfilled, for
constitutional purposes they do not exist. The rabble's exclusion from
the political community arises from their failure to satisfy the
condition that one must labor to secure one's independence and to
participate fully in civil society. This condition stands in sharp
contrast to the classical conception of the healthy body politic,
wherein exemption from labor frees the individual to fulfill the duties
of citizenship.[^13] On the contrary, for Hegel labor is not exclusively
concerned with meeting individual needs but with contribution to the
needs of civil society as a whole. It is, as we have seen, how the
particular and universal moments of civil society come together. Labor
is therefore a precondition for full inclusion in the citizenry.

Second, the rabble slides into laziness and frivolity. We can see how
this refers back to the discussion in the *Phenomenology*. Without
labor, the rabble's desires are unrestrained, and they slide into
frivolous consumption. What is more, they are denied labor's "practical
education," which cultivates the "habit of being occupied (*Gewohnheit
der Beschäftigung*) " and "the limitation of one's activity" to suit a
task at hand (§197; 14:168). This is no mere activity for activity's
sake. Rather, it encourages a certain seamless relationship between
means and ends: "a worker can be described as skilled if he produces the
thing as it ought to be, and if, in his subjective actions, he
encounters *no resistance to the end he is pursuing* (§197A; emphasis
mine). In this description, skilled work is portrayed as a microcosm of
freedom in general. Rational, self-determining activity in its most
developed sense involves freely willing what one ought without
experiencing a struggle between competing, countervailing desires (see
§23-4; 14:42-3).[^14] While in context this applies to the produced
object, labor also educates the laborer toward the observation of
universal norms, that is toward moral freedom: "the particular must rise
to the form of universality and seek and find its subsistence in this
form" (§186).[^15] In acquiescing to the tastes of others and
endeavoring to meet their needs, the individual limits his subjective,
arbitrary freedom in the face of others' demands. While observing norms
is ultimately for the *sake* of the individual, it nonetheless prepares
the individual for the authentic universality embodied in the state.
Inasmuch as the rabble lacks this opportunity, it must necessarily be
stunted in its ethical development.

*Conclusion: Hegel and the Automation of Labor*

As the previous sections have demonstrated, much hinges on whether
humans maintain their character as laboring beings. It is no
overstatement to say that, for Hegel, many of humanity's significant
attributes---self-consciousness, free and autonomous activity, political
participation---depend in large part on the fact that human beings labor
on the world. And yet, as we have also seen, Hegel is unflinching in his
diagnosis of the division of labor as ultimately corrosive of the
quality of labor. As employment grows increasingly abstract, workers
grow increasingly mechanized until machines can supplant them
altogether. In light of twentieth century Fordism and the later,
post-industrial economy, this prediction is clearly prescient.

Hegel is thus a worthy diagnostician of what we can expect to lose from
the automation of those remaining industrial jobs or from the push to
inject artificial intelligence into every corner of the post-industrial,
"information" economy. According to him, we might expect to see a crisis
of purposiveness, in which the "habit of being occupied" dissipates and
we are left listless, unable to give ourselves a direction. In other
words, more and more of us would become members of the rabble. One might
raise the question in response, however, of what is so worrisome about
this condition of laborlessness assuming one's needs are met. Leisure
is, after all, a good thing, and some measure of it is very likely a
human need, a thesis defended classically by Aristotle and more recently
by Joseph Pieper.[^16] Armed with both Hegel's arguments about labor in
the *Phenomenology* and his diagnoses of the threats to labor in the
*Philosophy of Right*, we are in a position to respond to this
objection.

Labor is, on the *Phenomenology*'s account, one of the centrifugal
forces that holds the self-conscious being together. It endows his "I
think" with a permanence that enables him to make and carry out a
life-plan. The permanence of the laborer and of the object of labor
develop in tandem as the latter disciplines the otherwise infinite
desire of the former. The threat, from either the vicissitudes of the
market or the mechanization of labor, is that there is no suitable
replacement for reining in self-consciousness's desire, that the subject
will always be stuck in a bad infinity of insatiable consumption. The
Hegelian rejoinder to the sort of utopia of leisure depicted (at least
rhetorically) in Marx's *German Ideology*---a utopia filled with
purposive, enduring activity, like criticism---is that it presupposes a
human subject whom labor has already constituted. Labor creates the kind
of subject who can, among other things, engage in critique. Whether or
not capitalism has succeeded in securing the material conditions for
such a laborless society, it is not clear on Hegel's account what kind
of human beings would remain to enjoy it.[^17]

[^1]: References to these texts will follow standard paragraph numbering
    and be provided in-text. In most cases, I have followed Terry
    Pinkard's translation of the *Phenomenology of Spirit* (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2018) and Andrew Nisbet's translation of
    the *Elements of the Philosophy of Right* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1991), though I have also benefitted from A.V.
    Miller's translation of the former and T.M. Knox's of the latter.
    References to the German editions are to *Phänomenologie des
    Geistes* in *Gesammelte Werke*, Band 9 (Hamburg: Felix Meiner
    Verlag, 1980) and *Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts* in
    *Gesammelte Werke*, Band 14.

[^2]: For a similar, albeit condensed, discussion, see Allen Wood,
    *Hegel's Ethical Thought* (New York: Cambridge University Press,
    1990), 87-88. Wood does not, however, treat the importance of
    cultivation (*Bildung*) in this section of the *Phenomenology*.

[^3]: Oran Moked, "Labor, Alienation, and the Transition to Stoicism in
    Hegel's "Phenomenology of Spirit," *Hegel-Jahrbuch* 2006 (Berlin:
    Akademie Verlag), 124. Moked's discussion pays scant attention to
    the role of permanence, however, as simple possession can likewise
    serve as an externalization of the subject (see *Philosophy of
    Right* §41-45).

[^4]: This dynamic anticipates Hegel's discussion of property and
    "Abstract Right" in the *Philosophy of Right*, §41-45.

[^5]: See Lisa Herzog's excellent comparative study, *Inventing the
    Market: Smith, Hegel, and Political Theory* (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2013) and Norbert Waszek's exhaustive *The
    Scottish Enlightenment and Hegel's Account of 'Civil Society'*
    (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1988).

[^6]: See Norbert Waszek, "Miscellanea: Adam Smith and Hegel on the Pin
    Factory," *The Owl of Minerva* 16.2 (1985), 229-233.

[^7]: Hegel's concern with mechanization emerges in his early writings.
    See Nathan Ross, *On Mechanism in Hegel's Social and Political
    Philosophy* (New York: Routledge, 2008), ch. 3. According to Ross,
    Hegel tasks the state with the regulation of the mechanicity of
    civil society. Yet mechanicity is a sliding scale, as Hegel makes
    clear, and more is worse for laborers.

[^8]: Smith shares with Hegel an awareness that simple, repetitive tasks
    lead the laborer "to be mutilated and deformed." See *Wealth of
    Nations*, V.i.f.50-61.

[^9]: See Joel Bock, "Technology, Freedom, and the Mechanization of
    Labor in the Philosophies of Hegel and Adorno," *Philosophy &
    Technology* 34 (2021): 1263-85.

[^10]: That Hegel leaves the problem of poverty unresolved has been
    remarked on many times. See, for example, Michael O. Hardimon,
    *Hegel's Social Philosophy* (New York: Cambridge University Press,
    1994), 236-250; Shlomo Avineri, *Hegel's Theory of the Modern State*
    (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1974), 154; Frank Ruda,
    *Hegel's Rabble* (New York: Continuum, 2011).

[^11]: Herzog, *Inventing the Market*, ch. 4.

[^12]: Hegel does suggest that the conversion of the rabble into
    overseas colonists might relieve pressure on the labor market (see
    §248A). Within the state itself, however, the problem is
    intractable. Nor does colonization represent a tidy resolution to
    the problem of unemployment, since there is not unlimited land to be
    colonized.

[^13]: Cf. Aristotle, *Politics*, 1278a; Hannah Arendt, *The Human
    Condition* (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1958), §5.
    Hegel does retain a universal estate, whose needs are met by the
    state (§205). Yet Hegel never denies that this class is performing
    *labor*. The dichotomy labor/citizenship does not hold.

[^14]: "Only in this freedom is the will completely with itself (*bei
    sich*), because it has reference to nothing but itself, so that
    every relationship of dependence on something other than itself is
    thereby eliminated" (§23). See also Robert Pippin, *Hegel's
    Practical Philosophy* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008),
    ch. 5.

[^15]: See Paul Franco, *Hegel's Philosophy of Freedom* (New Haven: Yale
    University Press, 1999), 249-255.

[^16]: Aristotle, *Ethics* 1177b and *Politics* 1337b; Joseph Pieper,
    *Leisure, the Basis of Culture* (trans. Alexander Dru) (San
    Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2009).

[^17]: I am grateful to Paul Wilford and Susan Shell for discussions on
    these topics that greatly improved this chapter.
