# MacIntyre on work as a practice

Matias Petersen

Two aspects of MacIntyre's moral philosophy are relevant to his
reflections on work: the notion of practices and the idea that our
practical rationality is developed as we learn to educate and transform
our desires. The first notion was introduced by MacIntyre in *After
Virtue* when he was trying to develop a sociologically grounded account
of Aristotelian ethics. The second idea, although present in most of
MacIntyre's work, emerges more prominently with the publication of
*Dependent Rational Animals*.[^1] I turn to practices first, since this
is the standard way of explaining the relevance of MacIntyre's
philosophy for contemporary discussions on work.

Practices, in the MacIntyrean sense of the term, are socially
established and cooperative activities, with various degrees of
complexity, whereby agents pursue certain goods that are constitutive of
those forms of activity. In this context, agents are expected to
gradually internalize and develop themselves those standards of
excellence that are required for the achievement of the goods 'internal'
to that form of activity. Through this process agents extend or develop
their human potentialities and their understanding of the goods involved
in whatever practice they find themselves engaged in. Examples of
practices include the arts and sciences, games like chess or basketball,
the activities of farming communities or fishing crews, and the making
and sustaining of family life or schools.[^2]

It is worth expanding on some elements of MacIntyre\'s account of
practices. First, it is important to notice the sharp distinction
between internal and external goods. Internal goods are those for the
sake of which the practice exists; they are constitutive of that
practice and provide it with its end or *telos*. In contrast, goods
externally related to a practice are not constitutive of it, in the
sense that they might be present in any kind of practice. Classic
examples of these goods are financial resources, prestige or social
status. Unlike internal goods, external goods are only instrumentally
good and thus the role they should play in a practice is only
intelligible in light of those goods that are internal to it.

Another characteristic that MacIntyre assigns to internal goods is that
they are common goods, i.e., goods for the whole community of
practitioners. By contrast, external goods seem to be 'rival goods',
i.e., the more someone has of them the less there is for other
practitioners. In effect, a crucial difference between internal and
external goods is that the latter, once achieved, are always part of
someone's property and possessions. For this reason, MacIntyre thinks
that external goods are "characteristically objects of competition in
which there must be losers as well as winners".[^3] Internal goods are
also the result of a certain kind of competition, but it is the
competition to excel in the particular practice, and they are
essentially "a good for the whole community who participate in the
practice".[^4]

In addition to the distinction between internal and external goods,
there is a distinction to be made between those standards of excellence
which are specific to a particular practice from the qualities of
character that are required by any kind of practice. The former are
better understood as skills that are practice-relative, such as the
ability of a car mechanic to do a compression test on an engine, or the
ability of a schoolteacher to master quadratic equations. Skills are
necessary but not sufficient for the sustenance of practices. As it will
become clearer below, social practices require that agents exhibit, at
least to some degree, those qualities of character that allow them to
recognize the goods internal to a practice and to structure the common
goods implied by the cooperative nature of the activity. These qualities
of character, the virtues, also help to expand and transform the
practitioners' conception of the goods internal to that practice and the
ways in which those goods are perfective of their rational powers. Thus,
there is an intimate connection between the goods internal to a
practice, the skills which serve those goods, and the moral development
of the agents involved. In MacIntyre's words,

> what is distinctive in a practice is in part the way in which
> conceptions of the relevant goods and ends which the technical skills
> serve \[...\] are transformed and enriched by these extensions of
> human powers and by that regard for its own internal goods which are
> partially definitive of each particular practice \[...\].[^5]

It is important to mention that the standards of excellence that make a
practice possible are not static. Characteristically, they find
expression in the form of norms that should be taken for granted and
followed by those who are initiated in that practice. This does not
imply that the standards of excellence cannot be challenged or
transformed by the relevant practitioners. Rather, the point is that one
cannot be \"initiated into a practice without accepting the authority of
the best standards realized so far\".[^6]

Lastly, MacIntyre points out that practices are always embedded in
particular organizational contexts, which can either facilitate or
endanger them. He uses the term institutions to name the organizational
context that makes practices possible. Thus, car restoration, as a
practice, requires a shop or a car restoration company. Similarly, a
group of physicists usually work in the context of a research laboratory
or a university. Now, since institutions are generally structured toward
the achievement of external goods, they can either foster or undermine
the practice itself. This will depend on whether the external goods that
the institution provides override, in the deliberation of the relevant
practitioners, the internal goods of the practice. In MacIntyre's words,
\"\[p\]ractices are often distorted by their modes of
institutionalization, when irrelevant considerations relating to money,
power and status are allowed to invade the practice\".[^7] Thus,
practices and institutions are so intimately connected that they form "a
single causal order in which the ideals and the creativity of the
practice are always vulnerable to the acquisitiveness of the
institution".[^8] Now, what prevents a practice from being corrupted by
an institution? This is where the virtues of the relevant practitioners
play a crucial role. If at least some of them do not exhibit the virtues
of justice, courage, or temperateness, it becomes more likely that the
practice will be subject to the \"corrupting power of
institutions\".[^9]

This analytical framework, where the virtues are situated in the context
of practices, and practices are embedded in institutions is what is
known in the literature as the virtues-practices-institutions framework.
The framework has been applied to a wide variety of contexts, ranging
from discussions about meaningful work to debates on corporate
governance.[^10] Now, if practices are, to a significant extent,
sustained by the virtues, how are the virtues themselves acquired?

Moral learning and practical reason
-----------------------------------

So far, I have only stated that practices have the potential of
fostering those qualities of character that we call the virtues, but I
have not explained how those qualities are acquired by individuals.
MacIntyre accounts for this process by pointing to the relationship
between desire and practical reasoning.[^11] The acquisition of the
virtues is a process of moral development which MacIntyre describes as
that whereby agents learn how to distinguish between what is actually
good for them from what they take to be good here and now. What agents
learn in this process is to evaluate their reasons for action according
to what is good for them as members of their family, workplace, or local
political community. In MacIntyre's terminology, agents become
'independent practical reasoners' when they can educate their desires by
evaluating their reasons for action according to what is best for them
as members of this or that social role, but also according to what is
best for them qua human beings. An independent practical reasoner is
someone able to exercise

> "human powers of rationality in very different types of culture and
> economy and therefore in very different contexts of practice: hunting,
> farming, mercantile, industrial. What it is for human beings to
> flourish does of course vary from context to context, but in every
> context it is as someone exercises in a relevant way the capacities of
> an independent practical reasoner that her or his potentialities for
> flourishing in a specifically human way are developed".[^12]

On his view, human beings flourish when they develop their powers as
rational agents and developing those powers is not only good for them,
but more profoundly, this is what the good life consists of.[^13] In
other words, human flourishing and the development of practical
rationality are constitutive of each other. MacIntyre draws on two
central theses of Aristotle for making this argument. The first one
relates to the fact that human beings can act for reasons, and those
reasons have certain features that other living animals do not exhibit.
MacIntyre suggests that what is characteristic of us as human beings is
that we are able to stand back from our initial judgements and to
evaluate our reasons for action according different standards. The
second thesis is that our capacity of evaluating our reasons for action
allow us to direct, educate and, sometimes, transform our desires. Thus,
human beings flourish insofar as they develop their capacity to desire
and act for the sake of what is good for them.

This is a standard argument in the context of contemporary
neo-Aristotelianism. Thus, for example, Daniel Russell argues that on a
neo-Aristotelian account of virtue, "ancient and modern alike, \[...\]
we are defined \[...\] by our capacity for practical reasoning, both in
thinking intelligently about what to do and in acting with emotions that
can be intelligently trained".[^14] Similarly, Elizabeth Anscombe
suggested that to desire something rationally "should be explained in
terms of what is wanted being wanted qua conducive to or part of 'doing
well', that is, conducive to or part of human flourishing".[^15]

MacIntyre frequently strates the process whereby agents learn to direct
and transform their desires with reference to the psychological
processes involved in the transition from infancy to childhood, because
it is in these early stages of our lives that we learn to distinguish
between an object of desire and the good. In effect, young children
usually pursue "the satisfaction of their wants and felt needs without
any reference to a good beyond that satisfaction".[^16] Similarly, most
of us have experienced situations in which what is good or best for us
is different from what our present desires or motivations lead us to
pursue. MacIntyre suggests that in "the case of both children and adults
there is a gap between what they have good reason to do and what would
satisfy some present desire".[^17] It is first as children, and then as
adults and in the context of a variety of different practices, that we
learn to recognize what we have good reasons to desire versus what we
happen to want here and now. In MacIntyre's words,

> "We do so \[...\] in the context of a variety of practices, each with
> its own ends internal to it, \[...\] activities as different as
> solving equations, growing vegetables, mending broken machines,
> playing the clarinet, reading Greek poetry, drawing cartoons, making
> clay pots, playing soccer. If all goes well, we develop in each area
> those habits, those dispositions, without which we cannot exercise the
> moral virtues. We also develop a habit of good practical judgement,
> the moral and intellectual virtue of prudence. Both types of
> habituation involve a transformation of desires and an increasingly
> sophisticated grasp of those standards, initially accepted on the
> authority of our teachers, by which they and hopefully we distinguish
> good from bad making and doing".[^18]

It is thus in the context of learning to recognize the goods internal to
practices that we develop those capacities that are conducive to human
flourishing. For MacIntyre, there are two aspects in which the
acquisition of the virtues is indispensable to human flourishing. First,
without at least some level of virtue we cannot do well in exercising
our capacities for practical reasoning. Secondly, taking notice of the
rage of activities in which our fate and that of those we care about are
mutually dependent, without the development of the virtues we cannot
"cannot adequately care for and educate others so that they first
achieve and are then sustained in the exercise or practical
reasoning".[^19]

It is worth noting that MacIntyre's account of the relationship between
desire and practical reason presupposes two important theses: (i) agents
can have reasons for action other than what their present motivations
and desires dictate; and (ii) when trying to give an explanation of why
an agent did such and such, we should not conflate evaluations and
expressions of desire. The two theses are intimately connected, but they
have their own particularities, and they refer to different
philosophical discussions. The first one seems to be incompatible with
Bernard Williams' internalism about reasons, whereas the second runs
against Donald Davidson's claim about the connection between expressions
of desire and moral evaluations.[^20] What is relevant for the present
discussion is that the idea of work as perfective of our human
capacities only becomes fully intelligible in the context of a
non-subjectivist account of the connection between practical rationality
and moral development.

Work and moral development 
--------------------------

How does MacIntyre\'s account of practical reason apply to the realm of
work? Recall from the previous section that agents become independent
practical reasoners when they learn to evaluate their reasons for action
and direct their desires with a view to what is good and best for them.
Now, productive work is precisely one of those realms of practical
activity where workers can expand their capacities of practical
reasoning. In effect, in *Ethics in the Conflicts of Modernity*
MacIntyre analyses different working arrangements and the ways in which
they can either foster or undermine our ability to become independent
practical reasoners. The examples studied by MacIntyre include the
automobile manufacturing industry in Japan after the reforms introduced
by W. Edward Deming, Wendell Berry\'s account of good farming,
sociologist Tom Burns\'s account of work at the BBC, and the history of
the Cummins Engine Company.[^21]

A recurrent theme in these passages of *Ethics in the Conflict of
Modernity* is that when workers have discretion over their working
conditions, they are more likely to develop their capacities as rational
agents. Put differently, when working arrangements are controlled and
designed by managers rather than workers, its capacity for fostering
workers' moral learning is undermined. An important implication is that
when a particular type of work is 'housed' in business environments,
where managers control most of the working process, the possibilities
for moral development are seriously compromised.

Let us see how these ideas play out in one of the examples studied by
MacIntyre, namely, the case of the reforms introduced by W. Edwards
Deming in the context of Japanese automobile manufacturers. In
MacIntyre's account of this case, Deming convinced Japanese manufactures
that the traditional production line --where monotonous, repetitive work
looms large-- was problematic. Under these circumstances workers are not
able to envision the end product to which their activities should be
directed, and the quality of those products is monitored by supervisors
and managers. A central theme in Deming's work is that, ideally, quality
control over production should be done at the lowest level possible,
insofar as those with more direct knowledge of the production line are
better placed for evaluating what might have gone astray in the process.
Thus, workers should be able not only to participate in deliberations
about quality, but even also to 'challenge' managers' account of the
process.

According to MacIntyre, after Deming's visit to Japan, workers in the
Japanese automobile industry were organized as teams working
cooperatively by moving the car together through different production
stages. This allowed them to minimize the gap between execution of
different tasks and the final product. Under these circumstances,
workers were better off than by simply repeating simple operations in
the context of the so-called Taylorist production line. Thus, MacIntyre
argues that the "ends informing the workers' activity are now those of
achieving through shared deliberation and decision the making of an
excellent car and of becoming excellent in making such cars".[^22]

In this context, workers become aware of the fact that the standards
required for the production of excellent cars are standards that they
have internalized, not standards simply imposed upon them by supervisors
and managers. In addition, it is in the context of the new design of the
production process, that workers are able to make distinctions regarding
the excellence of the car and their particular inclinations and desires,
so they can direct their attention to the final product and to the ways
in which their inclinations and reasons for action should be oriented.
Therefore, in MacIntyre's view, when enough discretion is allowed in job
design, excellence in the final product and the development of practical
rationality are fruitfully intertwined. If this discretion of tasks is
significant "desires are educated and transformed. Distinctions are made
between real and apparent goods, between objects of desire that agents
have good reason to pursue and object of desire that need to be set
aside if excellence is to be achieved. Feelings are transformed as what
agents care about changes\".[^23] In other words, when workers have more
discretion over their tasks, and when they are cognizant of the
connection between those tasks and the final product, their human powers
of practical rationality can be systematically extended.

Two things are important to note in this case. First, MacIntyre
restricts his analysis of the teachings of Deming to the case of
automobile manufacturers, but it is worth noting that Deming was not
only involved with automobile manufacturers, but more generally with the
Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers (JUSE). As reported by Mary
Walton, in March 1950, the director of the Union contacted Deming and
asked him to deliver a series of lectures to Japanese research workers,
plant managers, and engineers on quality control. The influence of
Deming among Japanese manufacturers was significant enough to explain
the creation of the Deming Prize, awarded by the Union of Japanese
Scientists and Engineers to an individual for achievements in
statistical theory -- Deming's main area of research -- and to companies
for outstanding accomplishments in statistical application.[^24] So it
turns out that Deming did not introduce significant reforms, rather than
influenced Japanese scientists and engineers to apply 'statical control'
techniques, which later had an impact in various industries, not only in
automobile manufacturing.

Second, it seems to me that MacIntyre takes too much for granted the
standard story of how Deming's approach to manufacturing is supposed to
give workers more room for personal development. Deming's method is
certainly an improvement compared to classical Taylorist approaches, but
it is strikingly similar to what is known as 'lean production', commonly
associated with Toyota, winner of the Deming Prize in 1965. Although
Deming seems to combine the benefits of mass production with the idea of
trying to maintain a craft mentality in the shop floor, it is far less
amenable to the notion of a MacIntyrean practice than other production
strategies. In fact, it is informative to compare Deming's approach with
the idea of 'reflective production' which inspired Volvo's Uddevalla
plant in Sweden.[^25]

According to Åke Sandberg, the production process in the Uddevalla plant
involved a group of approximately nine workers assembling a car from
beginning to end. In this context, teams of workers not only had the end
product in mind in a more radical sense, but also constantly deliberated
among themselves about alternative ways of organizing their own work,
which implied substantial discretion over their daily activities.[^26]
Sandberg acknowledges that there are similarities between the Uddevalla
model and that of 'lean production', at least in aspects such as their
efforts to be oriented to the needs of customers, or to promote worker
involvement and learning opportunities. However, it seems to be the case
that 'reflective production' is closer to the notion of a MacIntyrean
practice than 'lean production'.

The Uddevalla case is relevant for yet another reason. Recall from the
first section that MacIntyre emphasizes how practices are always
embedded in specific organizational structures, which he calls
institutions. In addition, he has been explicit about the ways in which
broader social structures, like markets or sates, interact with
different institutions either promoting or endangering the development
of practices.[^27] Now, one does not have to accept MacIntyre's
endorsement of Marxian economic theory in his later work to recognize
that markets do in fact exert significant pressures on alternative ways
of organizing production.[^28] It seems to be the case that these are
precisely the types of forces that explain why the Uddevalla production
model was not viable in the long run. In effect, research on the
Uddevalla case illustrates how this model was not necessarily less
efficient than 'lean production' models. The reasons that explain why
Volvo finally closed the Uddevalla plant have to do more with market
pressures and the politics of the Volvo itself rather than with
downsides in productivity.[^29]

Now, MacIntyre suggests that instances of 'meaningful work', such as
those exemplified by the Uddevalla case, are the exception rather than
the rule. One possible explanation for the exceptional nature or working
arrangements that are conducive to moral development is that, on
MacIntyre's view, business managers not only have weak incentives to
introduce reforms such as the ones mentioned above, but more radically,
introducing such reforms could compromise their claims to authority. In
effect, it is MacIntyre's thesis that the justification of corporate
authority has an ideological twist, insofar as corporate managers
justify their claims to authority and control of the production process
appealing to some kind of scientific expertise, an expertise supposedly
justified on scientific grounds.[^30] In MacIntyre's words:

> the major justification for the intervention in society is the
> contention that government has resources of competence which most
> citizens do not possess \[...\] Private corporations similarly justify
> *their* activities by referring to their possession of similar
> resources of competence. Expertise becomes a commodity for which rival
> state agencies and rival private corporations compete. Civil servants
> and managers alike justify themselves and their claims to authority,
> power and money by invoking their own competence as scientific
> managers of social change.[^31]

MacIntyre argues that managerial experts would only have this type of
knowledge if the conception of "social science as providing a stock of
law-like generalizations with strong predictive power" were true.
However, it is MacIntyre's claim that this conception of the social
sciences is far from being justified. He thinks that the most salient
fact about the social sciences is "the absence of the discovery of any
law-like generalizations whatsoever".[^32] This implies that, on his
view, there is no reasonable justification for the way in which
authority is exercised by corporate managers over workers.

Finally, there is another aspect of MacIntyre's thought that is relevant
for understanding his skepticism about the viability of working
arrangements that are conducive to moral development. For MacIntyre,
work can be regarded as worthwhile or meaningful depending on whether it
is able to develop our powers of rational agency. In contrast, the
evaluative standards of mainstream economics, which have had a
significant impact in policymaking, lead us to regard work as "something
settled by markets and by the preferences of those who engage in market
relationships".[^33] This critique of the normative standards in
mainstream economic theory is worth emphasizing. It is not an attack on
economics as such. What MacIntyre is trying to make more explicit is the
gap that exists between the implicit account of practical reason in
normative economics and a neo-Aristotelian account of practical reason.
For MacIntyre, the account of practical reason that underlies much of
contemporary economic theory leaves no room for an understanding of
human flourishing that is consistent with the claims of
neo-Aristotelianism. In other words, a normative standard that stops at
the level of preference satisfaction misses the point by ignoring the
process of evaluating the kind of preferences that are being satisfied.
Although the notion of preferences can be and has been understood in
many ways, a common interpretation of them is expressivist in the sense
that there is no real distinction between our desires and the standards
used in evaluating them.[^34]

Thus, in MacIntyre's view, when the logic of preference satisfaction
dominates the policies aiming at improving working conditions, work
tends to be organized in such a way that the work performed by agents is
only intelligible, for them and for their managers, as a "cost-effective
means to ends imposed by others for the sake of high productivity and
profitability".[^35] As a consequence, if a particular industry passes
through a time of economic prosperity, workers might get a reasonable
share of the profits generated in that context, but the pay they receive
has no intrinsic connection with whether the work being done is
worthwhile from the standpoint of an account of moral development such
as that defended by neo-Aristotelians.

In sum, MacIntyre's account of practical reason allows him to consider
the extent to which productive work can foster our capacities of
practical reasoning. When workers have enough discretion over their
tasks, excellence in the final product and the development of practical
rationality can reinforce each other. However, as I have tried to
explain below, MacIntyre regards instances of 'meaningful work' as the
exception rather than the rule. The reasons for MacIntyre's skepticism
stem partly from the various ways in which broader political structures
impact on the ability of corporations to experiment with different
working arrangements. In addition, MacIntyre thinks that the incentives
managers face, and the way in which they justify their claims to
authority, are not compatible with giving workers more discretion over
their work. For him, when work is managed, and because it is managed, it
tends to be structured in a way that inimical to excellence. Finally, if
the idiom of preference satisfaction permeates political
decision-making, labor reforms will be directed toward the satisfaction
of workers' present desires rather than to creating an environment that
fosters their independent practical reasoning. The reader may judge if
MacIntyre's understanding of the relationship between practical reason
and meaningful work is too demanding for contemporary economic
structures or whether his account of work do in fact point toward a
radical rethinking of the workplace.

[^1]: Alasdair MacIntyre, *Dependent Rational Animals. Why Human Beings
    Need the Virtues* (London: Duckworth, 1999).

[^2]: Alasdair MacIntyre, *After Virtue. A Study in Moral Theory*
    (London: Bloomsbury, 1981), 187.

[^3]: MacIntyre, 190.

[^4]: MacIntyre, 191.

[^5]: MacIntyre, 193--94.

[^6]: MacIntyre, 190.

[^7]: Alasdair MacIntyre, "A Partial Response to My Critics," in *After
    MacIntyre. Critical Perspectives on the Work of Alasdair MacIntyre*,
    ed. John Horton and Susan Mendus (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1994),
    289.

[^8]: MacIntyre, *After Virtue*, 194.

[^9]: MacIntyre, 194.

[^10]: The literature is by now extensive. Informative examples include
    Geoff Moore and Ron Beadle, "In Search of Organizational Virtue in
    Business: Agents, Goods, Practices, Institutions and Environments,"
    *Organization Studies* 27, no. 3 (2006): 369--89; Ron Beadle and
    Kelvin Knight, "Virtue and Meaningful Work," *Business Ethics
    Quarterly* 22, no. 2 (2012): 433--50; Caleb Bernacchio and Robert
    Couch, "The Virtue of Participatory Governance: A MacIntyrean
    Alternative to Shareholder Maximization," *Business Ethics: A
    European Review* 24, no. S2 (2015): S130--43; Geoff Moore, *Virtue
    at Work: Ethics for Individuals, Managers, and Organizations*
    (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017); Ron Beadle, "Work, Meaning,
    and Virtue," in *The Oxford Handbook of Meaningful Work*, by Ron
    Beadle, ed. Ruth Yeoman et al. (Oxford University Press, 2019),
    72--87; Matthew Sinnicks, "'We Ought to Eat in Order to Work, Not
    Vice Versa': MacIntyre, Practices, and the Best Work for Humankind,"
    *Journal of Business Ethics* 174, no. 2 (November 2021): 263--74;
    Javier Pinto‐Garay, Germán Scalzo, and Martin Schlag, "Whose Work?
    Which Markets? Rethinking Work and Markets in Light of Virtue
    Ethics," *Business Ethics, the Environment & Responsibility* 32, no.
    S1 (April 2023): 4--14.

[^11]: As mentioned, this is present in various works. For the purposes
    of this chapter, I focus mainly on what MacIntyre has said in
    *Dependent Rational Animals* and *Ethics in the Conflicts of
    Modernity*.

[^12]: MacIntyre, *Dependent Rational Animals*, 76--77.

[^13]: See MacIntyre, 64; see also Philippa Foot, *Natural Goodness*
    (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), chap. 3.

[^14]: Daniel C. Russell, "Virtue Ethics, Happiness, and the Good Life,"
    in *The Cambridge Companion to Virtue Ethics*, ed. Daniel C. Russell
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 13.

[^15]: G.E.M. Anscombe, "Thought and Action in Aristotle," in *New
    Essays on Plato and Aristotle*, ed. Renford Bambrough (London:
    Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1965), 155.

[^16]: MacIntyre, *Dependent Rational Animals*, 86.

[^17]: MacIntyre, 86.

[^18]: Alasdair MacIntyre, *Ethics in the Conflicts of Modernity: An
    Essay on Desire, Practical Reasoning, and Narrative* (New York:
    Cambridge University Press, 2016), 49--50.

[^19]: MacIntyre, *Dependent Rational Animals*, 97.

[^20]: See Bernard Williams, "Internal and External Reasons," in *Moral
    Luck: Philosophical Papers 1973-1980* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1981), 101--13; and Donald Davidson, "Expressing
    Evaluations," in *Problems of Rationality* (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2004), 19--38, respectively. For example, Williams
    suggests that "\[i\]f something can be a reason for action, then it
    could be someone's reason for acting on a particular occasion, and
    it then would figure in an explanation of that action. Now no
    external reason statement could by itself offer an explanation of
    anyone's actions", Williams, "Internal and External Reasons," 106.

[^21]: See MacIntyre, *Ethics in the Conflicts of Modernity*, 130,
    170--72.

[^22]: MacIntyre, 170.

[^23]: MacIntyre, 131.

[^24]: "Beginning in 1950, prizes were awarded to companies adept at
    using the new-found statistical tools of \[...\] Statistical Quality
    Control. Soon, however, Japanese firms began to move beyond that
    narrow application. By the late 1970s, quality had evolved into an
    all-encompassing approach consistent with Dr. Deming's Fourteen
    Points, which the Japanese call Total Quality Control, or TQC.
    Today, Japanese companies are judged on the quality, if you will, of
    their TQC", Mary Walton, *The Deming Management Method* (New York:
    Perigee Books, 1986), 122. For a more nuanced account of Deming's
    influence in Japan see William M. Tsutsui, "W. Edwards Deming and
    the Origins of Quality Control in Japan," *The Journal of Japanese
    Studies* 22, no. 2 (1996): 295--325.

[^25]: I became aware of the relevance of the Uddevalla case thanks to
    Keith Breen, "Production and Productive Reason," *New Political
    Economy* 17, no. 5 (2012): 611--32; and Moore, *Virtue at Work*,
    161--62.

[^26]: See Åke Sandberg, "The Uddevalla Experience in Perspective," in
    *Enriching Production. Perspectives on Volvo's Uddevalla Plant as an
    Alternative to Lean Production*, ed. Åke Sandberg (Aldershot:
    Avebury, 1995), 5.

[^27]: See, for example, Alasdair MacIntyre, "How Aristotelianism Can
    Become Revolutionary. Ethics, Resistance, and Utopia," in *Virtue
    and Politics. Alasdair MacIntyre's Revolutionary Aristotelianism*,
    ed. Paul Blackledge and Kelvin Knight (Notre Dame, Indiana:
    University of Notre Dame Press, 2011), 11--19.

[^28]: On MacIntyre's endorsement of Marxian economic theory see
    MacIntyre, *Ethics in the Conflicts of Modernity*, 93--101. For a
    sympathetic critique of his argument see Matias Petersen, "The
    Epistemological Crisis of Marxian Economic Theory," *Prometeica -
    Revista de Filosofía y Ciencias*, no. 20 (January 21, 2020): 18--33.

[^29]: See Frits K. Pil and Takahiro Fujimoto, "Lean and Reflective
    Production: The Dynamic Nature of Production Models," *International
    Journal of Production Research* 45, no. 16 (August 15, 2007):
    3741--61.

[^30]: This MacIntyrean critique of managerial rule also applies to
    state bureaucracies; see Alasdair MacIntyre, "Social Science
    Methodology as the Ideology of Bureaucratic Authority," in *The
    MacIntyre Reader*, ed. Kelvin Knight (Cambridge: Polity Press,
    1998), 53--68.

[^31]: MacIntyre, *After Virtue*, 85--86, emphasis in original.

[^32]: MacIntyre, 88.

[^33]: MacIntyre, *Ethics in the Conflicts of Modernity*, 172.

[^34]: For an expressivist account of preference satisfaction see Allan
    Gibbard, "Preference and Preferability," in *Preferences*, ed. Ulla
    Wessels and Christoph Fehige, Perspectives in Analytical Philosophy
    (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1998), 239--59. I address this problem
    with more detail in Matias Petersen, *Political Economy,
    Institutions and Virtue: Alasdair MacIntyre's Revolutionary
    Aristotelianism* (London: Routledge, 2024), chap. 3.

[^35]: MacIntyre, *Ethics in the Conflicts of Modernity*, 172.
