Mises: The Disutility of Labor

**Abstract**

Human action is a purposeful behavior conducted by individuals to
maximize their utility. In praxeology, it is uncommon, if not
impossible, for humans to engage in behaviors that leadÂ to an expected
loss of well-being. Every purposeful activity is pursued to increase
utility. However, if we look at the labor process, humans are engaging
in an activity that is seen as unpleasant and uncomfortable. In this
sense, humans suffer the negative utility of labor to benefit from the
positive future value of leisure. Ludwig Von Mises recognized this
conflicting relationship between labor and leisure and sought to
illuminate this significant conundrum. Mises observed that when people
work, they seem to participate in a process that does not provide
positive value; on the contrary, work is frequently uncomfortable for
individuals and often ends up reducing their utility. Many employees do
not like their jobs -- rather, they see them as a means to an end. As a
result, the act of working, according to Mises, is an activity that
causes disutility. The goal of this chapter is to traverse what Mises
referred to as the "disutility of labor."

**Introduction**

"Well, a bad day of fishing is better than a good day at work," jokes
the wise fisherman. This whimsical thought tells us more than we might
initially think. It reflects a common view among individuals of the
relationship between labor and leisure. A turbulent, but necessary
relationship that finds itself at the center of the study of human
action. First, man engages in a grueling and uncomfortable labor
process, in order to eventually enjoy the benefits of a full day of
fishing and drinking.

In the history of ideas, the turbulent relationship between leisure and
labor propelled many socialist ideas. Karl Kautsky, a prominent
socialist thinker in the late 19^th^ and early 20^th^ centuries,
recognized the pain that is often involved in the laborious process.
However, the disutility of labor, Kautsky asserted, was an inherent
issue of capitalism, and a socialist revolution would need to transform
labor from pain into pleasure. However, in *Human Action*, the Austrian
economist Ludwig Von Mises takes Kautsky's claim as problematic and
contradictory to existing praxeological knowledge regarding work (Mises
1949\[2012, pp. 133, 137\]). According to Mises, labor creates
disutility as long as the worker engages in the laborious process as a
means to attain a specific end. That is, work is inherently unpleasant,
and it creates a loss of utility.[^1]

The puzzle seems clear: if we examine the laborious process purely in
terms of utility, individuals constantly engage in an activity that is
deemed to reduce utility. Man endures this negative utility of working
only to enjoy the utility of leisure later. Mises noticed this curious
relationship between labor and leisure and attempted to shine a light on
what seems to be turbulent relationship. When working, a man seems to
engage in a process that does not grant a positive utility. Yet, many
people do not enjoy the activity of working, but use it as a means to
achieve a determined end. Hence, in order for an action to be considered
labor, according to Mises, it is necessary for the individual to
perceive that activity as a means to an end.

In the next sections, we will examine Mises's definition of labor, his
conceptualization of the disutility of labor, explore a few exceptions
that might overcome the disutility of labor, and finally, we will
conclude our thoughts in the last section.

**The Nature of Labor**

While labor is initially perceived to be a standard concept, the idea of
human labor can easily be incorporated into activities which should not
be classified as labor. In *Human Action*, Mises (1949 \[2012, 131\])
defines human labor as the "employment of the physiological functions
and manifestations of human life as a means." That is, labor is defined
as a tool for the attainment of specific human ends. Consequently,
leisure is its polar opposite -- the act of forgoing labor (Fegley and
Israel, 2020).

Labor is an inherently scarce resource since humans have a finite
quantity of energy; hence "every unit of labor can only bring about a
limited effect (Mises, 1949 \[2012, 131\])." A consequence of the
scarcity of labor is the incapacity of most individuals to attain every
possible end or desire. Humans must choose wisely how and for what ends
they will employ their physiological functions. Given its scarcity,
workers need to economize their physiological functions and only employ
it where they find it suitable for the attainment of an end. This leads
to differences among the workers: People not only face differences in
their physiological function (e.g., their abilities) but also in what
they prioritize through their physiological function. That is, the "work
a certain individual can perform is more suitable for some ends, less
suitable for other ends, and altogether unsuitable for still other ends"
(Mises 1949 \[2012, 134\]).

For the sake of comparison, Mises describes a hypothetical world where
labor is abundant, and thereby unconstrained by scarcity. In this world,
all material factors of production are completely employed -- including
the labor supply. Consequently, the employment of labor would not lead
to an increase of output. As Mises points out, the wages offered by the
market in this scenario would be insufficient to sustain an individual
or their family financially. Since there would be an abundant labor
supply, its price would be extremely low. Like any other product, if
widely available and easily replaceable, all else equal, the price of
that good will be lower than if it was not widely available.

In reality, our world is constrained by the scarcity of labor, among
other constraints. For instance, Labor may not always be easily
replaceable or widely available. Workers' productivity differs from each
other. According to Mises, there is an inherent inequality among the
results of labor. That is, the results of any given laborer's work might
vary significantly in terms of quality and quantity, making it unlikely
that any two workers will have the same level of productivity. Take Adam
Smith's pin factory as an example: A worker whose role is to straighten
the wire might have a different level of productivity than another
worker who performs the same job. Mises considers this to be the fatal
mistake of classical economists who considered wages to be a function of
labor expended rather than being based on the productivity of the
workers.

**The Disutility of Labor**

Initially, Mises's definition of labor may appear overly broad since it
is easy to think of examples where humans employ physiological functions
for the attainment of a specific end but would not necessarily be
considered work. Imagine a recreational tennis player who employs
physical effort as a means to attain the end of winning the match. Is
the activity of the tennis player considered human labor? Mises (1949
\[2012, 138\]) replied to this point by using a similar analogy:

> Hunting game was and is for many people regular disutility-creating
> labor. But there are people for whom it is pure pleasure. In Europe
> amateur hunters buy from the owner of the hunting-ground the right to
> shoot a definite number of game of a definite type. The purchase of
> this right is separated from the price to be paid for the bag. If the
> two purchases are linked together, the price by far exceeds the prices
> that can be obtained on the market for the bag.

Here, Mises stresses two points. First, one of labor\'s defining
characteristics is that its byproducts result in disutility for the
worker. Second, he posits the higher price paid to hunt as evidence that
these hunters obtain utility from hunting. Admittedly, there are some
exceptions where a similar activity can be considered labor. However,
there are also differences between these types of activities.

For instance, fishing, like hunting, is practiced as both a hobby and
work. Fishermen who go at dawn to set up their nets in the margins of a
lake and comeback at sunset to sell their catches in order to provide to
their family are engaging in a different activity from fishermen who
practice fishing with friends during a hot summer weekend. The
difference lies simply on the idea that the first group of fishermen
experience the disutility of labor, while the second group of fishermen
does not. The disutility of labor, like utility in general, is
subjective to the individual.

By the concept of the disutility of labor, Mises means that there is an
uneasiness related to labor. That is, all else equal, people value
leisure more than they value the expenditure of labor. Leisure, in that
sense, "is valued as a good and that labor is regarded as a burden"
(Mises 1949 \[2012, 65-66\]). Therefore, leisure or the attainment of
leisure can be seen as an end of purposeful behavior. If, on one hand,
leisure is considered an end in itself, on the other hand, labor can be
viewed as a means to an end. That is, when working, "the worker gives up
leisure and submits to the disutility of labor in order to enjoy either
the product or what other people are ready to give him for it" (Mises
1949 \[2012, 137\]).

Mises argues that labor, by definition, does not create gratification.
In general, "People trade the disutility-bringing labor for the products
of labor; labor is for them a source of mediate gratification" (Mises
1949 \[2012, 137\]). That is, labor is simply a means to an end. A
logical implication of Mises's position is the idea that if there is
some "labor" that creates pleasure instead of reducing it, if there is
some type of labor where there is no disutility of labor, no wage will
be awarded for that activity. Such a situation requires the activity to
be an end, not a means to an end. Hence, in reality, any such activity
is not labor *per se*, but leisure. By extension, no activity can
simultaneously be labor and leisure in Mises's framework. This idea
precisely explains the hunting and fishing paradox.

Mises's argument can easily be applied to the case of the two groups of
fishermen. The first group is giving up leisure time and submitting to
the disutility of labor. That is, fishing is a burdensome activity that
they engage in to attain a specific end -- in this case, their family's
survival. The fishermen internalize the burden of waking up early,
facing the heat of a clear summer day sky, the burden of the employment
of physical and mental energy into the labor-intensive activity of
fixing and placing the nets, steering the boat, and pulling the fish on
board. They endure this so that, after an entire day at the lake, they
may sell some fish at a local market to sustain their families. Fishing,
in this case, is simply a taxing process for eventually attaining the
desired end.

The second group of fishermen, however, practice a very similar
activity. They wake up early on the weekend and spend an entire day at
the lake. All that so they can return at the end of the day with a few
pictures, a catch, and some fishermen stories. However, for these
fishermen, the entire fishing process only created enjoyment. It did not
create disutility of labor, but on the contrary, it created pleasure and
excitement. The fishing weekend activity was an end of itself. The goal
of the activity was not to provide for their families or any other goal
that requires fishing as a means.

The same can be said about a hunter. Someone who hunts for a living
engages in a very different physical and mental activity from someone
who practices hunting as a sport. Suppose that both hunters employ the
same number of calories in the activity, use the same rifle, camouflage,
and truck, and spend the same time of their day hunting. All else equal,
the only reason their activities are seen as different is that one is a
means to an end, and the other is an end of itself. Hence, one hunter's
actions lead to the disutility of labor, and the other's actions leads
only to enjoyment and pleasure. The hunter who hunts for a living
engages in the laborious process, whereas the hunter who hunts for fun
engages in leisure since they are forgoing actual work to enjoy a day
hunting.

Mises's position is highly connected to a marginalist, individualistic,
and subjective approach to economics. There is nothing inherent in
physical activity that defines labor. There is an entire range of
activities that require from individuals a level of physical and mental
effort. However, at the end of the day, what truly defines labor is the
idea that the individual perceives that action as a means and not an
end. The disutility of labor is a result of each individual's
rationalization of their action. That is, if an individual perceives
fishing as a means to attain an income, then fishing is labor, and the
individual is subjected to the phenomenon of disutility of labor.
However, if the individual perceives fishing as an end of itself, then
fishing is not labor but rather leisure.

**The Labor Utopia**

It was precisely the misunderstanding of the disutility of labor
phenomenon that gave rise to a common interpretation of working
relations among socialist thinkers. Socialist thinkers identified the
poor working conditions created by the Industrial Revolution as one of
the primary factors driving the discomfort of engaging in the laborious
process. Kautsky argues Socialists sought to transform labor into

> ...a joy, so that it will be a pleasure to work, so that the laborer
> will go to his work with pleasure. To be sure that is not so simple a
> thing, but at least a beginning to it can be made by the proletariat
> at the beginning of its rule in that it will shorten the hours of
> labor. At the same time it will endeavor to make the place of labor
> more hygienic and friendly and to take from the labor process as much
> as possible its disagreeable repulsive side that the laborer will go
> to his work with pleasure. (Kautsky 1903, Vol II Part I)

Kautsky believed that it was possible to transform the discomfort
associated with labor into joy. That is, by promoting better working
conditions and more labor regulations, the laborer will yield on net,
pleasure from labor.

Mises points out that it is a mistake to attribute the disutility of
labor exclusively to the capitalist system. Mises argues that the
disutility of labor is a phenomenon that is an inextricable part of
human nature. The idea that a more regulated economy overcomes the
disutility of labor ignores the root of the phenomenon.

> People have misinterpreted this fact grotesquely and have based on
> this misinterpretation fantastic plans for social reforms. One of the
> main dogmas of socialism is that labor has disutility only within the
> capitalist system of production, while under socialism it will be pure
> delight. We may disregard the effusions of the poor lunatic Charles
> Fourier. But Marxian "scientific" socialism does not differ in this
> point from the utopians. One of its foremost champions, Karl Kautsky,
> expressly declares that a chief task of a proletarian regime will be
> to transform labor from a pain into a pleasure (Mises 1949 \[2012,
> 137\]).

There are two main reasons why the disutility of labor can never be
disentangled from labor itself. First, limiting the hour of labor does
not change the phenomenon itself. Whether the laborer works six hours
per day or twelve hours per day, they will still be facing disutility of
labor. However, there is a marginal difference. That is, the government
will be restricting the laborer's ability to make a choice if one more
hour of disutility of labor is compensated by the benefits of that same
hour of labor. As Mises points out, like any other economic phenomena,
labor is dependent on subjective marginal utility. Second, since
disutility of labor is inherent to human nature, the environment of work
alone neither diminishes nor eliminates the disutility of labor. While
the environment that you are in may generate discomfort, this is due to
the environment itself, and not from labor. The disutility of labor is
an internal subjective mental activity that individuals assign.

Suppose for a moment that Karl Kautsky is correct, and that a socialist
system is able to transform labor from a pain into a pleasure (Kautsky
1903, Vol II Part I). If that is the case, the activity that people are
performing in his socialist utopia cannot be considered labor, since it
is not "the employment of their physiological functions for the
attainment of ends other than the mere exercise of these functions. It
is merely pleasure. It is an end in itself; it is done for its own sake
and does not render any further service" (Mises 1949 \[2012, 137\]). If,
and only if, an activity is being exercised to the achievement of an
end, this activity can be considered labor. Hence, if socialism
transforms work into pleasure, then work, under a socialist system,
cannot become labor but simple pleasure. The act of straightening the
wire in a factory under a socialist regime is an end of itself and not
labor.

In this sense, in this utopian socialist economy, labor would not exist,
and consequently, labor markets would be nonexistent. As Mises (1949
\[2012, 138\]) points out, "people trade the disutility-bringing labor
for the products of labor." Therefore, if labor does not yield
disutility, then people cannot acquire the products of labor. Trade in
this scenario ceases. Furthermore, if labor does not bring disutility,
it would become abundant.

Like any other service or good, if its supply increases, we will see a
decrease in price. One might argue that this is one of the reasons why
extremely pleasurable occupations are usually as well compensated as
unpleasant occupations. But this often does not hold true since it
ignores the demand component of labor markets. All else equal, in a
hypothetical world where suddenly every individual gains utility from
labor -- such as Kautsky's hypothetical socialist system -- there would
be an increase in the labor supply, and thereby reduced wages in
equilibrium.

Opportunity cost and the law of diminishing marginal utility would still
grant compensation. Even in the hypothetical world where labor is
enjoyable, individuals are still subjected to these economic principles.
Economizing man will need to allocate their time among different
activities, and they would still face diminishing returns like any other
pleasurable activity.

This hypothetical world is nothing more than that -- hypothetical. Labor
is a source of delayed gratification and not immediate gratification.
People engage in the pain of labor so they can purchase other
activities, goods, and services.

**The Creative Genius**

One notable exception to Mises's definition of labor is the creative
genius. Creative geniuses are "pioneers," people who discover and create
what was previously unknown to mankind. A creative genius does not
experience the phenomenon of disutility of labor. According to Mises:
"The activities of these prodigious men cannot be fully subsumed under
the praxeological concept of labor. They are not labor because they are
for the genius not means but ends in themselves" (Mises 1949 \[2012,
139\]).

For example, consider Michelangelo in the process of creating the
*fresco* "The Creation of Adam" in the Sistine Chapel. During the
creative process, Michelangelo does not face disutility since the
*fresco* is not a means to an end but an end itself. The artists are not
necessarily in search of financial value as a compensation for their
work (even though many artists do get compensated), but in search of
aesthetic value (Piano and Al-Bawwab, 2023).

Curiously, sometimes, in the search of aesthetic value, artists ended up
indirectly profiting. If the market values aesthetic value, then the
artist, by pursuing the creation of aesthetically pleasing *frescos*,
can profit from it. Nevertheless, though Michelangelo did not face the
disutility of labor, he also did not necessarily gain gratification
while completing his work. The process might very well have been
frustrating, but not in the same sense as a regular laborious process.

> It is, furthermore, impossible to substitute other people's work for
> that of the creators. If Dante and Beethoven had not existed, one
> would not have been in a position to produce the *Divina Commedia*
> \[italics in original\] or the Ninth Symphony by assigning other men
> to these tasks. Neither society nor single individuals can
> substantially further the genius and his work. (Mises 1949 \[2012,
> 140\]).

The creative genius, being an entrepreneur, a painter, a musician, a
poet etc., is bound to a unique set of creations that did not exist
before, and therefore the demand for such work was not yet fully
understood. The work of the creative genius, their creation, remains one
of the exceptions of the phenomenon known as the disutility of labor.

**Conclusion**

Mises' understanding of the disutility of labor highlights the inherent
discomfort associated with work. Individuals inherently perceive labor
as a burden, and it functions as a means rather than an end in itself.
This disutility motivates people to work for future leisure or other
rewards. Regardless of the economic system, the disutility of labor
persists.Â 

Mises' analysis demonstrates that, despite improved working conditions,
labor remains a source of disutility due to its inherent nature. This
directly contradicts socialists' claims that socialism would not only
remove the disutility of labor but turn it into an enjoyable activity.
Admittedly, there are exceptions to Mises's argument, particularly the
creative genius, whose work surpasses the disutility of typical labor
due to intrinsic motivation and creative fulfillment. However, his
general criticisms of the socialist theories regarding labor -- that the
disutility of labor is unique to capitalism, and that socialism can
convert the disutility of labor into positive utility for workers --
remain unrefuted.

Creative geniuses, such as artists and innovators, pursue activities
that are an end in themselves. Mises' praxeological framework emphasizes
the subjective nature of labor and its disutility, reinforcing the
notion that a desire to maximize utility ultimately motivates the
laborious process with the expectation of gaining leisure in the future.

**Reference**

Fegley, Tate, and Karl-Friedrich Israel. 2020. The Disutility of Labor.
*Quarterly Journal of*

*Austrian Economics*, 23(2), 171-179.

Jevons, William Stanley (1879). The theory of political economy.
Macmillan.

Kautsky, Karl. 1903. *The Social Revolution, Vol. II* (A.M. and May Wood
Simmons). Charles Kerr &Co.

Linsbichler, Alexander. 2021. Rationalities and Their Limits:
Reconstructing Neurath's and

Mises, Ludwig Von. 1949 \[2012\]. *Human Action* *A Treatise of
Economics*. Martino Publishing.

Piano, Ennio E., and Rania Al-Bawwab. 2023. The artist as entrepreneur.
*The Review of Austrian*

*Economics*, 1-19.

[^1]: The concept of loss of utility is often referred as disutility.
    This term appears as early as the work of the economist W.S. Jevons
    (1879)
