# The New Natural Law Theory and the Basic Human Good of Work

Christopher Tollefsen

University of South Carolina

The "New" Natural Law Theory (NNLT) is a moral theory grounded in a
reinterpretation of Saint Thomas Aquinas's understanding of the first
principles of the natural law, elaborated and defended over several
decades initially by Germain Grisez, John Finnis, and Joseph Boyle, and
subsequently by many other philosophers and moral theologians (see Lee,
2019). It provides a distinctive account of the role that the good of
work plays among practical reason's foundations. In this essay, I
identify the NNLT account of the nature of and value of work. I then
look at some practical consequences of the NNLT understanding of the
good of work; and situate the NNLT understanding of work within a larger
theological context.

## I.  The Foundations of Practical Reason

All action, on the New Natural Law account, aims at some good. The chain
of practical reason identifying our possible reasons for action cannot
go on forever, and eventually terminates, for rational action, in one or
another of a limited number of "basic human goods." Goods such as human
life and health, knowledge, friendship, aesthetic experience, personal
integrity, marriage, and religion all offer agents opportunities for
action that promise forms of benefit that are unique to each good and
irreducible to any other good. It is thus perfectly intelligible to seek
knowledge, for example, for its own sake, beyond the obvious
instrumental benefits provided by that good.

"Work" is often identified by NNL theorists in conjunction with the good
of "play" and more recently, it is encompassed within a single good of
"excellence in performance" (Finnis, 2011, 448). In Germain Grisez's
1983 statement of the theory, the basic good is identified as
"activities of skillful work and of play, which in their very
performance enrich those who do them" (Grisez, 1983, 124). Here and
elsewhere, emphasis is on the skilled performance as that aspect of
either work or play that benefits and perfects human persons: whether
one is playing a musical instrument, writing a philosophy paper, or
engaged in the cooking of a meal, an agent is better off if she plays
well, writes capably, or cooks with knowledge and skill rather than, in
any particular case, doing so in a careless, slovenly, or ignorant way.
So work and play both share a core aspect that is perfective of human
beings.

Of course, there is a common-sense difference between activities which
we would consider work and activities we would consider play that NNL
theorists would not deny: work always has an external product which is
at least partly an end for the agent, while the agent who is engaging in
play can seemingly do so for the sake of the activity of play itself. It
is work, for example, to plow a field, build a table, or write a book;
it is play to engage in an athletic contest, to dance, or to play cards
with friends.

Nevertheless, this apparent difference seems ultimately to be only
apparent, for play *does* result in an external product, namely, the
*playing* itself: the dancing, for example, is a reality that comes into
being with the activity of the dancers. One might object that work is
done *for the sake of* the external object in a way that play is not;
but while it is true that the forms of work are shaped more by the
demands for this or that product (as I will discuss shortly), the *good*
of work, like the good of play, is, again, to be found in the skillful
activity that produces the product; the production of an external
reality just as such is not the perfective aspect of either work or
play. So there is a strong argument for considering the good at stake
here to be unitary: it is the good of *excellence in performance for its
own sake*. That excellence can be pursued even in projects for which a
concrete material object is also sought as a product: the paradigm case
of work. It can also be sought when it is the performance itself which
is the primary end. And, because of the way in which, in fact, even play
results in an external reality, the activities of dance, or sport, or
any other paradigmatic form of play can likewise be sought in whole or
in part for the sake of that external reality as a product to be enjoyed
or consumed by others, i.e., play can be pursued as a form of work.

Is there then *any* difference between play and work on the NNL account?
I believe there is (Tollefsen, 2020). In the paradigmatic form of play,
the standards by which excellence or skill are determined, identified,
and pursued are to a great degree internal to the activity itself. In a
game, for example, a contingently determined set of rules is
constitutive of the play of the game and its resolution (e.g., in
victory and defeat), and what it means to be skilled at the game emerges
in relation to that set of constitutive rules. There is thus no real way
to identify excellence in performance in a game in a social world that
lacks that game.

By contrast, the standards of excellence and skill in work are
determined to a considerable extent by the nature of the product that is
sought. When the work one is engaged in is that of the physician, and
one's end is ministering to a patient's health, that end is
determinative of what it means to be an excellent or skilled physician.
The excellence that is perfective of the physician is not purely
internal to a social form or practice that can be identified apart from
the end that is sought in the practice.

This is true also when play is pursued *as* work for the sake of the
external product of the activity of play itself, for a form of play
really only becomes a form of work if there is something about the
external constituted reality that is desirable from the point of view of
those not directly engaged in the play themselves (or desirable to the
players for reasons external to the good of the performance itself). For
example, some (though perhaps not all) forms of dance are enjoyable for
non-participants to watch. It is thus the external reality of a dance
*considered as an object of aesthetic contemplation* that now will
partly shape what it means to be skilled and excellent at dance, at
least when it is considered a form of work and not "merely" play. The
same could be said of many games that become "professionalized."

Nevertheless, it remains the case that the most central benefit of both
work and play for the agent engaged in either is to be found in the
excellence of skilled performance. And this, in turn, is consistent with
a claim that is central to the NNL theory, and, I believe, to the
entirety of the Thomistic tradition of ethics, viz., that the goods that
perfect human beings are, as Grisez puts it, "aspects of persons, not
merely things they have" (Grisez, 1983, 121). In a recent paper, John
Finnis puts this claim into dialogue with the work of Pope Saint John
Paul II, who distinguishes between the external aspect of work \-- its
exterior object \-- and its subjective aspect \-- that in work which
remains in the agent (Finnis, 2020). Elsewhere, the Pope refers to the
transitive and intransitive aspects of action, including the action of
working. Work, as action that is chosen freely, is thus itself
perfective of the human being, part of the agent's self-constitution
that comes about through deliberation, choice, and action. As Finnis
puts it,

> one's free choices establish, create one's own identity or character
> -- not, of course, one's identity as male or female, or (somewhat
> differently) as slave or free, identities that are not within one's
> power to choose for oneself. Thus one's choices are not only
> transitive, i.e., transiting out from one's will into one's behavior
> and one's efficacy in shaping things and events in the world. They are
> also intransitive: each free choice is an act by which I who am
> choosing constitute myself the person I will henceforth be, as the
> person I will remain unless and until (if ever) I repent of that
> choice, either formally by contrition and resolve to amend my ways, or
> informally by making a new choice incompatible with the former one
> (Finnis, 2020, 8).

Thus, as I will discuss in the next section, whether one works well or
not will be central to the person one is and becomes. Work, like all
other basic human goods, offers human persons opportunities for
constituting themselves well or ill, and thus an agent's dispositions
and choices toward the good of work are central features of the ethical
life.

## II. Ethical Action

As noted, the NNL theory identifies a multiplicity of human goods. Each
such good is distinct from the others: there is no single form of good
or goodness to which the variety is reducible, no homogenous property to
be found across all actions that aim at human goods. Thus, as between
categories of goodness there is an important form of incommensurability
that vitiates the possibility of an objective ranking on the basis of
the goodness of different *kinds* of good.

There is a second kind of incommensurability to be found between the
different options that the goods make available as opportunities for
agents. Just as it is possible to pursue the good of knowledge in a
perhaps infinite variety of ways, so it is also possible to pursue the
good of work in a perhaps infinite variety of ways (and of course,
pursuing knowledge in a sustained form of inquiry, such as scientific
inquiry, *is* work), the vast majority of which surely, are not yet
known (a point I return to shortly). But for an agent faced with
distinct options to pursue this or that different good, or even this or
that instance of the same good, there is no commensurability *of
goodness* by which one option may be ranked as possessing more good than
another. For an agent faced with the necessity of free choice between
options, then, a maximizing strategy is non-sensical.

Instead, NNL theorists argue that the appropriate response as determined
by practical reason is one of openness to all the goods in all persons
for whom the goods are goods. Such openness would be blocked were
reason's categorical openness to be fettered by desire, and so the
foundational norm of morality may be understood, as it was by classical
moral theorists, as "Follow right reason" (Boyle, 2013). One can also
identify at least as an ideal the state of affairs that would be willed
by an agent who willed only in accordance with right reason: an ideal of
integral human fulfillment among all persons. Moral choices could then
be governed by consideration of which options were and were not in line
with right reason and integral human fulfillment. NNL theorists
articulate the first principle of morality so understood as "In
voluntarily acting for human goods and avoiding what is opposed to them,
one ought to choose and otherwise will those and only those
possibilities whose willing is compatible with a will toward integral
human fulfillment" (Grisez, Finnis, and Boyle, 1987).

This first principle of morality remains to be specified in a set of
general norms that then can play a more substantive role in practical
deliberations. So, for example, NNL theorists argue that some action
types are such as to be reasonably judged *always morally
impermissible*, namely, when the action is such as to include intended
damage or destruction to an instance of a human good (Finnis, 1991).
Intended killing of a suffering patient for the sake of relief of his
suffering is morally wrong, for example, since it is a violation of this
norm.

A second general norm concerns fairness: one should not let the
distribution of burdens and benefits that result from one's actions to
be determined by feelings that are not in accordance with reason. To
accept benefits from an action while shifting burdens onto those who
will gain nothing, for example, is often a failure of fairness. This
norm is at the heart of many, though not all, considerations of justice,
and thus obviously is of political and well as personal importance
(Finnis, 2011, 106-109).

Two other norms are of relevance to the discussion of the good of work.
The first concerns the structure of an agent's life. Reasonable pursuit
of the goods requires commitments; but commitments, if not adequately
ordered in relation to one another are likely to conflict. Thus
reasonable agents consider the order of their pursuit of human goods and
the commitments they make in pursuit of such goods across the whole of
their lives. The reasonable agent, that is, thinks vocationally about
the order of his or her life (Finnis, 2011, 103-105).

A second concerns the ways in which the experience of at least some
goods, and perhaps all, can be simulated without all, some, or perhaps
any of the actual good being realized. Drugs can be consumed in order to
create the experience of knowledge or friendship; fake remedies pursued
to create the illusion but not the reality of good health; religious
rituals can be engaged that foster sentiment but not genuine harmony
between human and divine (Grisez, 1983, 214-215).

How are these norms brought to bear on the good of work? Having
identified four general norms, all in need of further specification, in
the remainder of this section, I briefly discuss the ways in which each
norm can be followed or violated.

A.  No Intentional Damage or Destruction of an Instance of a Basic Good

Criticizing the norm against intentional damage or destruction of a
basic good, Michael Pakaluk writes that in accordance with this norm, a
"police officer can no more stop the loud trumpeter from playing outside
my window at night, it seems, than society can execute a murderer"
(Pakaluk, 2018). But this does not follow from an adequate account of
intention: the police officer wishes to restrict the noise that is made
and to enable me to sleep; that the good of play, as such, is
restricted, is a side effect; one might say the same when the police
officer interrupts me *at work* to ask about a local crime:
interrupting, and hence in some sense damaging, the good of work is here
a side effect.

What could it mean to intend damage or destruction of an instance of the
good of work? Since the core of that good is excellence in performance,
it would seem that *intending non-excellence* in some particular
performance is a violation of the norm. This might be pursued as an end,
out of some form of hatred for the good, or, as seems more likely, as a
means to some end. One might, for example, deliberately do shoddy work
in order to: make someone angry, engage in a form of protest, cheat
someone, and so on. Of course, these instances of deliberate sabotage of
the good must be distinguished from all the ways in which, sometimes
reasonably, sometimes unreasonably, we do less than our best work, but
where the privation of excellence is a side effect -- of lack of
sufficient care, of time constraints, of faulty work habits, and so on
(some of these causes will be further addressed below). But to
deliberately seek the privation of excellence in performance as an end
or means will be genuinely to violate this norm, and thus is always to
be ruled out by practical reason functioning without error.

B.  Fairness

Work is frequently -- perhaps most frequently -- pursued in community
with others. Work is done within families to maintain households, within
business settings with other employees and supervised by employers,
within government agencies, and so on. It is clear that these settings
are the occasion of many forms of unfairness; the discussion will thus
be far from exhaustive.

There are, to begin with, the forms of unfairness that can be brought
about by poor performance even when performance is not intended as
impoverished (though also when it is): to do poor work often shifts
burdensome consequences of poor work onto persons other than the agent
of the work. In some cases, those burdens are imposed on other
employees, in some cases on employers, and in some cases on both.

Poor workmanship typically creates poor products; in some cases, these
render the products' consumers unable to make adequate use of those
products. In other cases, it can make those consumers unsafe. These
constitute unfair burdens to the consumer of the product. And if poor
products are sold at the same or similar price as better products, with
their failings concealed, this is additionally unfair to the consumer
*qua* purchaser.

Much work consists of providing services to consumers, rather than a
created product (and many forms of work do both). Poor service of
others, even when not intended as poor, creates strains in personal
communion between the worker and those she serves. In principle, service
jobs of almost any sort are opportunities for the extension of
community: to help another, even when carried out as part of one's job,
builds interpersonal communion between persons, and to allow that
communion to be damaged because one is unwilling to do good work is very
often to be unfair. This can easily be seen by considering how unhappy
we are to be on the receiving end of another agent's bad personal
service, whether in a restaurant, when dealing with a government agent,
or in a medical context, for example. To be willing to work poorly in a
service job is thus to fail to abide by the Golden Rule: Do not do unto
others as you would not be done by.

In a broader context, work creates occasions of fairness and unfairness
with regard to hiring opportunities, interpersonal treatment within the
workplace, and wages. Here, as elsewhere, the concerns of fairness are
reasonably articulated as concerns of justice: it is a matter of
justice, and hence of right, that persons be hired on the basis of
characteristics and skills relevant to excellence of performance; it is
a violation of justice and right to hire in a way that unreasonably
favors some over others on the basis of characteristics irrelevant to
such performance. It is a matter of justice and right that the workplace
be an environment in which employers treat employees and employees treat
their employers and each other respectfully, honor reasonable boundaries
of personal space, and cooperate on terms of mutual reciprocity; it is a
failure of justice and right when such conditions do not exist. And it
is, finally, a matter of justice and right, because a matter of
fairness, that work be justly remunerated, that good work be
acknowledged and sometimes rewarded; likewise that important work be
acknowledged and rewarded; and that persons generally be rewarded for
their work in ways that do not rely upon arbitrary or discriminatory
differences such as race or sex.

The NNL understanding of work is Catholic, and the work of Grisez and
Finnis, among others, is deeply consonant with that of John Paull II
especially. That Pope wrote that "However true it is that man is
destined for work and called to it, in the first place, work is 'for
man,' and not man 'for work'" (Pope John Paul II, 1981, \#6). This must
remembered in thinking about the nature of the workplace and the
relationship between employer and employee; in addition to the common
good of whatever product or external reality the work of a group serves,
it must always also serve the common good of good work itself.

## III.  Work and Personal Vocation

The lives of persons should manifest good order, and that order is
brought about in many important respects through the making of
commitments that structure the agent's life. The most ultimate of such
commitments, a religious comment, will be discussed in the final section
of this essay. Here, it suffices to note that among the most important
structuring commitments after religious and familial commitments is that
to an agent's work. Much work requires a period of apprenticeship in
which the agent learns how to do good work -- for some forms of work
that period is quite extensive. And for many forms of work, good work
can only be achieved through some form of devotion and concern for
excellence at that work. So one's commitment to this or that form of
work will typically play an important role within one's personal
vocation, the life plan to which one believes oneself called.

This, in turn, requires the agent to give attention to one's chosen
field of work to ensure that it is fully reasonable. In discerning
whether this or that form of work should be integrated into the
structure of an agent's vocation, the agent should surely consider
ability, opportunity, desire, and need. Does the agent have the
requisite natural talent for this or that form of work? Are there
opportunities for this form of work available to the agent? Is it
something she is emotionally suited for? And does the product of this
form of work respond to genuine human needs, as opposed to unreasonable
desires?

Agents who, having considered these questions and answered them
reasonably, judge it reasonable to make a commitment to this or that
form of work must then insure that their commitment is itself reasonably
ordered in relation to other vocational commitments. In some cases, the
ways in which the demands of one commitment should relate to those of
another are set by the nature of the good pursued in the commitment. So,
for example, commitment to the good of marriage rightly takes a kind of
precedence over other commitments: one's commitment to one's work thus
needs to be ordered appropriately in relation to one's marriage and
family responsibilities. On the other hand, a form of work like
doctoring requires significant commitment of time and energy; it is
likely to be incompatible with a number of other pursuits that might be
too time consuming, too risky, or perhaps inappropriate for someone with
a physician's commitment to health to pursue.

## IV.  The Appearance of Good Work

In regard to many goods it is possible to distinguish between the
reality of the good's pursuit, and the appearance of its pursuit, the
subjective sensations characteristic of the good's successful pursuit.
Excellence typically has internal to its experience certain forms of
pleasure, for example, and it is thus possible to attempt to pursue
simulations of those pleasures without pursuit of the genuine good
itself. Other experiential aspects of the pursuit or achievement of a
good can also be simulated.

For example, the experience of friendship, without the real thing, can
be simulated in friendships of pleasure, or even by means of the shared
enjoyment of intoxicants among relative strangers. But to pursue the
appearance of the good apart from the real thing is unreasonable, judged
by the standard of the first principle of morality.

The experience of excellence in performance that is internal to the
pursuit of the good of work is likewise simulable. A student about to
work can spend an inordinate amount of time *preparing* for work, for
example, and various psychological stratagems might be utilized to
convince oneself that one had done better work and achieved more than
was actually the case. This is different from deliberately doing poor
work and perhaps typically involves some form of self-directed
dishonesty ("I really put in eight good hours today!"). So it seems
necessary to cultivate virtues of truthfulness and well as other forms
of discipline in order to make sure one's experience of good work tracks
reality.

More could be said in relation to each of these ethical dimensions of
work on the NNL account. Readers are encouraged to consult, for example,
Chapter 10 of Germain Grisez's *Way of the Lord Jesus, Volume II, Living
a Christian Life, "Work, Subhuman Realities, and Property" (Grisez,
1983). I turn now, however, to the relation of work in the NNLT to that
theories larger theological claims.*

III. The Theological Frame

In this final section I offer only three brief remarks on the
theological significance of the NNL account of the good of work.

Central to Germain Grisez's moral theology and eschatology is a
particular understanding of the Kingdom of Heaven as the ultimate end of
human life. The Kingdom is a form of communion between all persons,
human, non-human (angelic, Martian), and divine, that encompasses all
aspects of human flourishing -- all human goods. In the Kingdom, the
possibilities for human flourishing, in communion with all other
persons, are extended eternally in a perpetually open-ended way: human
flourishing in the Kingdom is not a project that will ever be "complete"
(Grisez, 2008).

Thus, *first*, the good of work is of necessity present in eternal life
in the Kingdom if it is an essential aspect of human flourishing. But,
presumably, in the Kingdom above all, the gap between work and play is
even smaller than in this mortal life, since the need for external
products of the sort needed for this human life will be minimized or
perhaps eliminated. What will remain is the possibility of continued
excellence of performance, in accordance with internal standards that
can scarcely be imagined by us now. Since both the forms of performance
and their standards are provided for us by God for the sake of His
eternal glory -- the glory of the coming to fruition of His loving plan
for us -- there is a way in which, or a standpoint from which, the good
of excellence of performance can be seen as the form of life in the
Kingdom.

*Second*, the Kingdom is both prefigured and prepared in the work of
this mortal life. Grisez's eschatology is deeply formed by a passage
from the Second Vatican Council's *Gaudium et Spes:*

> For after we have obeyed the Lord, and in His Spirit nurtured on earth
> the values of human dignity, brotherhood and freedom, and indeed all
> the good fruits of our nature and enterprise, we will find them again,
> but freed of stain, burnished and transfigured, when Christ hands over
> to the Father: \"a kingdom eternal and universal, a kingdom of truth
> and life, of holiness and grace, of justice, love and peace.\" On this
> earth that Kingdom is already present in mystery. When the Lord
> returns it will be brought into full flower (Second Vatican Council,
> 1965, \#39).

Thus, the fruits of the work that is done on earth will be found in the
Kingdom. This includes especially the intransitive fruits, for by our
good work we constitute the good character which a necessary condition
of being worthy to enter the Kingdom; buy also, it seems, it will
include in some way the transitive fruits of our "enterprise", which we
will find again burnished and transfigured. The suggestion here is that
some aspects of the material world and culture which are built in and
through human work will also be part of the Kingdom.

So work will be part of the Kingdom, and work prefigures and constitutes
the Kingdom. In both ways, work partakes of a theological significance.
In conclusion I wish to suggest a *third* dimension of the theological
significance of work which is made apparent within the NNL theory. In
its transitive dimension, work obviously works with the materials of the
natural world, transforming them, but not essentially creating them. But
every choice to work, and to work well, in a way shaped by the norms
articulated earlier in this essay, does indeed bring something from
nothing, for there are no sufficient conditions for any particular
choice being made except for the free choosing of the agent whose choice
it is.

Thus, the choice to work is in a real way an image of and even
participation in God's creation *ex nihilo*. As Finnis notes, "by work,
human persons fulfil, develop or realize themselves, that is, we each
share in God's creation of us, even when the work -- what we are working
on, or working at -- is humble in its 'objective character' as work"
(Finnis, 2020). That we are able to work is thus a profound instance of
"participation in God\'s wisdom and goodness by man formed in the image
of his Creator. It expresses the dignity of the human person and forms
the basis of his fundamental rights and duties" (Catechism of the
Catholic Church, 1987, \#1978).

REFERENCES

*Boyle, Joseph. 2013. "On the Most Fundamental Principle of Morality,"
in Reason, Morality, and Law: The Philosophy of John Finnis, edited by
John Keown and Robert P. George. Oxford: Oxford University Press.*

*Catechism of the Catholic Church. 1997. Accessed May 14, 2024:
https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG0015/\_INDEX.HTM.*

*Finnis, John. 1991. Moral Absolutes: Tradition, Revision, and Truth.
Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press.*

*Finnis, John. 2011. Natural Law and Natural Rights, 2^nd^ edition.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.*

*Finnis, John. 2020. "John Paul II and the Foundations of Ethics,"
Accessed May 13, 20204.
<https://angelicum.it/st-john-paul-ii-institute-of-culture/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/Finnis-JP2-Lecture-2020-21.pdf>.*

*Grisez, Germain, John Finnis, and Joseph Boyle. 1987. "Practical
Principles, Moral Truth, and Ultimate Ends," American Journal of
Jurisprudence 32: 99--151.*

*Grisez, Germain. 1983. The Way of the Lord Jesus, vol. 1, Christian
Moral Principles. Quincy, IL: Franciscan Press.*

*Grisez, Germain. 2008. "The True Ultimate End of Human Beings: The
Kingdom, Not God Alone," Theological Studies 69: 38-61.*

Lee, Patrick. 2019. "The New Natural Law Theory," in *The Cambridge
Companion to Natural Law Ethics*, edited by Tom Angier, 73-91.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

*Pakaluk, Michael. 2018. "The Philosophical Case against the
Philosophical Case against Capital Punishment," Public Discourse,
Accessed May 14, 2024:
<https://www.thepublicdiscourse.com/2018/01/20643/>.*

*Pope John Paul, II. Laborem Exercens: On Human Work. Accessed May 14,
2024:
<https://www.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hf_jp-ii_enc_14091981_laborem-exercens.html>.*

*Second Vatican Council. 1965. Gaudium et Spes. Accessed May 14, 2024:
<https://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19651207_gaudium-et-spes_en.html>.*

*Tollefsen, Christopher. 2020. "The Good of Play in John Finnis's
Natural Law and Natural Rights," Revista Persona y Derecho 83: 571-590.*
