***Plato and Aristotle on Craft and Craftsmen***

*Labour is blossoming or dancing where*

*The body is not bruised to pleasure soul*

William Butler Yeats, "Among School Children"

James Bernard Murphy

Professor of Government

Dartmouth College

Hanover NH 03755

<James.B.Murphy@Dartmouth.edu>

**Craft**

The puzzle at the heart of Plato and Aristotle's appraisal of work is
that they both combine high praise for craftsmanship with frequent
denigration of craftsmen. W.B. Yeats wondered "how can we know the
dancer from the dance?"[^1] We might ask how Plato and Aristotle
distinguish craftsmanship from craftsmen and why they honor the first
and disparage the second. Both thinkers exclude craftsmen from
citizenship, and yet Plato calls his philosophical rulers "the best
possible craftsmen" and he calls ruling "the royal craft."[^2]

Both thinkers praise the knowledge required for skillful work but
disparage the manual skill and sheer toil of human labor; they praise
those who conceptualize the task but disparage those who merely execute
it. As such, their appraisals reflect their own views of the greater
dignity of intellectual over physical activity, preventing them from
seeing that the knowledge of craftsmen cannot be separated from their
manual skills, and that craft knowledge can be acquired only through the
body. Craftsmanship is the unity of conception and execution, mind and
hand.

Most of the scholarly literature concerning economic issues in Plato and
Aristotle is focused on property rights, buying and selling, money, and
slavery.[^3] There is much less scholarship about the nature of craft,
about the roles of work and labor in a good human life.[^4]

What attracted Plato to craftsmanship was its combination of
instrumental rationality and orientation to the good of others. A craft,
says Plato, exemplifies rationality because makers know in advance what
they want to make and then, because of their genuine knowledge, reliably
make it.[^5] Craftsmanship thus vividly illustrates the Platonic ideal
of mind over matter, of invisible form over visible content. True makers
do not copy existing artifacts, but look to the ideal form of what they
plan to make.[^6] A genuine craft requires scientific knowledge, not
mere practical know-how.

Both Plato and Aristotle compare craft knowledge to scientific knowledge
on the grounds that: 1) it involves universal principles of causation,
making crafts reliable and predictable; 2) the craftsman can explain how
he produces the effects he does and can teach his craft to others, not
just impart it by example.[^7] Both thinkers contrast craft with an
acquired knack based on rules of thumb or with mere trial and error
experience. Plato compares craftsmen to god, saying that they both
possess genuine knowledge of what they make.[^8] As Aristotle says:
"knowledge and understanding belong to craft rather than to experience .
. . for men of experience know that the thing is so, but do not know
why, while the craftsmen know the 'why' and the cause."[^9] True
craftsmen can teach their craft whereas men of experience can only
impart their craft to those who imitate them.[^10]

Socrates interrogates a wide variety of Athenians to see if they know
what they are talking about. He reports that the craftsmen do possess
genuine knowledge of their craft; where they go wrong is in thinking
that they also know about ethics and politics.[^11] Nothing is more
common than for people with expertise in one domain to make
pronouncements in others. But when Socrates interrogated the poets, he
began to doubt whether poetry was truly a craft. The poets could not
explain the meaning of their own poems any better than the bystanders;
nor could the poets explain how they produced their poems: "I soon
realized that poets do not compose their poems with knowledge, but by
some inborn talent and by inspiration, like seers and prophets who also
say many fine things without any understanding of what they say."[^12]

Unlike a craftsman, a poet, or anyone engaged in what we would call the
fine arts, does not know in advance what he will make. Indeed, as Pablo
Picasso observed, if you know what you will create in advance, don't
bother. Works of art emerge through the mystery of what we call
creativity or inspiration---meaning that artists never fully understand
how they produce their art. The fine arts are rooted in craftsmanship,
but transcend it in creativity, originality, and individual
expressiveness. Plato has no word for the fine arts, but he lays the
foundation for R. G. Collingwood's influential distinction between
crafts and arts.[^13] Whereas we moderns rank the fine arts above the
crafts, Plato admires the rational knowledge of craftsmen more than the
inspiration of artists.

What does craftsmanship have to do with the good of others? Plato
brilliantly observed that crafts are inherently moral activities because
every craft is oriented toward the good of the layman, not the expert:
medicine is for the good of the patient, not the doctor; teaching is for
the good of the student, not the teacher; and, above all, ruling is for
the good of the ruled, not the ruler. Every genuine craft aims to
benefit the weaker not the stronger party: shepherding is for the
benefit of the sheep, not the shepherd. And because a craft involves
genuine knowledge, a craft secures genuine human good, not illusory
goods.[^14]

Although he calls ruling the highest craft, Plato often compares ruling
to lesser crafts such as medicine, shepherding, horse breeding,
navigation, weaving, and teaching. Like doctors, rulers administer harsh
remedies and tell lies for the good of the patient; like shepherds,
rulers guard their subjects from enemies and other dangers; like horse
breeders, rulers ensure that the best citizens breed only with the best;
like captains, rulers steer the ship of state; like weavers, rulers knit
different kinds of people into the fabric of the city; like teachers,
rulers lead citizens toward knowledge or at least true belief.[^15]

At other times, however, Plato contrasts the lesser crafts from the
craft of ruling. In the lesser crafts, the craftsman knows the most
efficient means to reach a given end, but not whether that end is
justified in context. A doctor, for example, knows how best to treat an
illness but not whether to treat an illness---if, for example, a patient
is too old or infirm. The art of ruling is different and cannot be
exercised without knowledge of the proper ends of politics. Plato says
that in judging whether to treat an illness, a doctor acts as a
statesman. That is why ruling is the royal craft.[^16]

Plato contrasts craft knowledge with an acquired "knack" (*tribē*) based
on rules of thumb. Plato says that pastry baking and cosmetics are not
crafts, but mere "knacks," or tricks used to pleasure the body, just as
rhetoric and sophistry are "knacks" or tricks used to pleasure the
mind.[^17] These knacks flatter people by providing them with
counterfeit goods: instead of nutrition, pastries offer only sweetness;
instead of reasons, rhetoric offers only feel-good emotions. Since there
is no science of what gives pleasure or flatters, there is no craft of
pastry-baking or speech-making.[^18] For Plato, a true craft must
provide a genuine good: health, not sweetness; knowledge, not flattery.

Plato pioneered the analysis of craft along these dimensions.[^19]
First, there is a sharp distinction between means and ends. In a craft,
we can always compare alternative paths to the same goal. We see
progress within crafts because makers discover new ways to make old
things. Second, a craft involves two stages: planning and execution.
While planning, the end or goal comes first to guide the selection of
means; while executing, the means come first and the end is reached
through them. Third, a craft presupposes the prior existence of both the
matter and the immaterial form: a maker merely informs the matter.
Fourth, a craft always distinguishes parts from wholes, and rigorously
subordinates the parts to the whole. In an artifact, the parts have no
rights against the whole. Finally, every craft is inherently oriented to
the good of the weaker party: medicine for the patient, not the doctor,
and, most importantly, ruling for the ruled, not the ruler.

**Skills and Virtues**

Although Plato argues that all genuine crafts are intrinsically oriented
to the good of others, Plato is aware that crafts, as concatenations of
knowledge and skills, can be misused: doctors can use their craft to
save or end lives; and rulers, notoriously, can exploit their subjects
for their own benefit. Crafts are not virtues: crafts are skills that we
acquire and wield; virtues are aspects of who we are. Virtues cannot be
misused because they cannot be used at all. Plato insisted that rulers
acquire not only the craft of ruling, but also the cardinal virtues, of
justice, courage, temperance, and wisdom. Without those virtues, the
craft of ruling, though oriented toward the good of the ruled, might be
misused. Plato argues that *qua* craftsman, the ruler seeks only what is
good for his people; but *qua* human being, the ruler might seek his own
enrichment instead.[^20]

Aristotle describes craft as an intellectual virtue, not a moral
virtue.[^21] A craftsman who errs by accident is a bad craftsman; a
moral agent who errs on purpose is a bad person. Better that the
craftsman err on purpose and better that the moral agent err by
accident.[^22] Craft is a kind of instrumental cleverness (*deinotēs*),
as when we say that someone is crafty. Practical wisdom includes
cleverness in addition to moral virtue, so that the practically wise
person is both clever and good. When you have craft, you still need
practical wisdom to make good use of it: the medical craft can be used
to produce health or disease.[^23] Craftsmanship, unmoored in moral
virtue, is dangerous because it is capable of great good or evil, like
any other form of cleverness.

Plato wants to argue that a true craftsman is, in one sense, a good
person. By doing so, Plato lays the foundation for our distinction
between a professional and a businessperson. Plato's Socrates argues
that in every true craft, the expert serves the needs of the layman and
the stronger party serves the weaker party---not himself.

But, objects Thrasymachus, a shepherd takes care of his sheep, not for
their benefit, but only so that he can later fleece or slaughter them
for his own benefit.[^24] Is shepherding, then, not a craft? Is not the
same true of most rulers, who rule for their own benefit? Socrates
answers that when a shepherd fleeces his sheep or takes them to market,
he is no longer acting as a shepherd but as a money-maker.[^25] Insofar
as he practices the craft of shepherding, the shepherd acts only for the
good of the sheep.

After distinguishing true crafts from the "craft" of money-making,
Plato's Socrates makes it clear that money-making is not a true craft
because it serves the interest of the money-maker: "no craft or rule
provides for its own advantage, but . . . it provides and orders for its
subject and aims at its advantage, that of the weaker, not of the
stronger."[^26] Socrates then heaps contempt on money-making: "Don't you
know that the love of honor and the love of money are despised, and
rightly so?"[^27]

A professional is someone who loves his craft because he wants to
provide a unique benefit to others: health, knowledge, counsel,
furniture, meals, etc. But, unless he is independently wealthy, he must
also support himself by earning a fee. A money-maker or businessperson
is someone who seeks his own advantage, not the advantage of those with
whom he deals. That is why we usually trust professionals, like doctors
and teachers, but not merchants---after all, we often think "let the
buyer beware." We cannot assume that a businessperson is motivated to
act in our own interest. Plato and Aristotle respect the practice of the
crafts but despise the pursuit of money for its own sake.

**Why Craftsmen Cannot Rule**

For Plato and Aristotle, a life of relentless getting and spending
leaves little time for the pursuit of the highest goods, namely,
politics and philosophy. Only those who are economically self-sufficient
have the leisure to cultivate their minds and properly exercise their
bodies. On a scale of self-sufficiency, they rank artisans above
unskilled laborers or slaves, and farmers above artisans.

For Greek aristocratic culture, leisure (*scholē*) was the norm while
work was the absence of leisure (*ascholia*); in our society, work is
the norm and 'free time' is the absence of work. For the Greeks, work is
a necessary evil for the sake of leisure; in our culture, free time is
devoted to the "re-creation" of our energies for work. We make use of
our free time with the habits of efficiency forged at work: we 'work
out' at the gym, 'work' on our basketball game, and even 'work' on our
marriage. No activity is respectable for us unless described as a kind
of work.

In Plato's ideal regime of the *Republic*, all producers and merchants
are completely excluded from the ruling class; the philosopher rulers,
in turn, are forbidden from owning property, let alone engaging in
commerce. Crafts, he says, degrade the soul and mutilate the body.[^28]
In his "second-best" regime, the *Laws*, Plato permits citizens to own
land, so long as they do not engage in manual labor or commerce, which
degrade a "gentleman's character." Instead, all work should be done by
wage-laborers or slaves.[^29] The citizens are gentleman farmers who
lead lives of leisure, dedicated to athletic and military exercise as
well as mental cultivation.[^30] They are strictly forbidden from
practicing any craft or engaging in any commerce.[^31]

Aristotle follows Plato's lead and is clear that in an ideal state,
citizens would not work as artisans, laborers, or merchants. Such ways
of life, he says, are ignoble and inimical to virtue. Manual labor
debases the body, and commerce debases the soul.[^32] Citizens should
also not work as farmers, who lack the leisure necessary for
politics.[^33] Aristotle concedes that farmers are the best citizens of
a democracy---a backhanded compliment, since he sees democracy as a
corrupt regime---because farmers are economically independent and make
good soldiers. Ironically, Aristotle also says that farmers make good
democratic citizens because they are too busy to attend the Assembly,
making them unlikely to join the urban mob.[^34] Ultimately, Aristotle
lumps farmers with artisans and unskilled laborers as unfit for
citizenship: they are conditions, not parts, of the polis.[^35]

Unlike ancient Egypt, in which one caste of people works, another caste
fights, and a third caste governs, ancient Athenian citizens prided
themselves on their ability to work, to fight, and to govern. Plato
seems to reject this Athenian versatility when he proposes a caste
hierarchy in the *Republic* wherein philosophers alone govern,
auxiliaries alone fight, and workers alone produce. Unlike traditional
caste societies, Plato's castes are based on aptitude not birth. Through
rigorous educational testing, the natural abilities of each student are
identified and they are assigned to their proper caste.[^36] Plato
explicitly anticipates that children of philosophers may well end up as
producers and children of producers may end up as philosophers.[^37]
Here we see the first meritocracy.

Plato not only divides his ideal society into functional castes, but he
also divides workers into distinct occupations. Because, says Plato,
each person has unique aptitudes, we quickly learn to specialize by
making what we are naturally suited to make. We are all better off if we
do what we are best suited to do, and exchange our goods and services
with others. Moreover, if we focus on one task we are more likely to do
it better than if we attempt to juggle several tasks, which makes us
prone to miss the "opportune moment" (*kairos*) to act. If we are baking
a cake while watching our kids, we might well burn the cake or neglect
the kids. Plato defends the occupational division of labor on two
grounds: first, that it takes advantage of natural differences in
aptitude; second, that it helps to promote proper attention to the task
at hand. This specialization, he says, enhances both the quantity and
the quality of what we produce.[^38] In his famous defense of the
division of labor, Adam Smith refers only to quantitative, not
qualitative improvements.

Just as we don't want a baker to try to make shoes, so we don't want a
producer to try to fight or govern. The harmony of the community depends
on each person doing what they are best suited to do and not meddling in
the affairs of others: let the cobbler stick to his last. Plato even
goes so far as to define justice as the harmony of a society in which no
one attempts to deprive another person of his or her rightful
occupation.[^39] Plato also makes it clear that he is less concerned
about bakers interfering with cobblers than he is about producers
interfering with rulers. When craftsmen attempt to involve themselves in
governing, the consequences are fatal to the community.[^40] Justice
rests on each caste sticking to its own function.

Aristotle does not divide society into three castes, but he does divide
all rational human activity into three kinds: production, action, and
contemplation. These are also ranked: producing is the lowest kind of
activity; it perfects the product, not the producer.[^41] The skill with
which an artifact is made reveals nothing about the moral virtue of the
producer. Even bad people can be good craftsmen; yet, says Aristotle, a
bad person cannot be a good friend or a good philosopher. Acting and
contemplating both perfect the agent; contemplation is more excellent
than moral action because contemplation perfects the rational soul while
action perfects the nonrational soul.

Each of these kinds of activities is governed by a distinctive kind of
rational excellence: production is governed by craft (*technē*); action
is governed by practical wisdom (*phronēsis*); contemplation is governed
by theoretical wisdom (s*ophia*).[^42] Craft enables us to make things
well; practical wisdom enables us to do things well; theoretical wisdom
enables us to contemplate well.

In a sense, all these activities---making, doing, and
contemplating---are kinds of work. When we say that an engine is
"working," we mean that it is functioning properly. The function of man
is to exercise his rational powers of making well, doing well, and
contemplating well.[^43] When we actualize our rational powers of craft,
practical wisdom, and theoretical wisdom, we are doing the work proper
to our rational human nature.[^44] Aristotle calls each of these three
activities an *enērgeia*, a word which literally means "putting a power
to work." When Aristotle defines happiness as "an activity of the soul,
in accordance with virtue," he means actualizing our potential or
putting our powers to work.[^45]

In English, we often contrast work with labor: a car engine works when
functioning properly, but a car engine labors when it is not. Our work
manifests our good function according to human nature, but our labor
manifests toil and pain. Labor implies punishing exertion, as when we
speak of someone being sentenced to "hard labor" or the infamous
"*Arbeit macht frei*." Aristotle associates painful, toilsome labor
(*ponos*) with slavery, extreme athletic training, and Spartan military
exercises.[^46] In all these cases, Aristotle claims that laborious
exertion does not build character, but deforms the body. Unlike many
Greeks, Aristotle does not admire the labors of Heracles. And indeed, a
life devoted to heavy labor does usually deform one's body.

Aristotle goes further: any "paid employment," he says, "degrades the
mind."[^47] Why? Because it is inherently degrading to pursue activities
solely for the sake of money. Modern psychologists have demonstrated
that offering a reward to a child for, say, reading, undermines a
child's enjoyment of reading and desire to read. In this sense, working
for money does degrade the mind by weakening our enjoyment of the
pleasures intrinsic to various activities. Aristotle himself recommends
pursuing occupation, including politics, for the sake of leisure. We
might well ask him: Is it worse to work for money than for leisure?

Aristotle distinguishes leisure from recreation. All work, he says,
involves some degree of toilsome labor, which is why we need time to
"re-create" our energies for work. We cannot work incessantly;
recreation is a necessary counterpart of work. Recreation, says
Aristotle, is medicine to treat the damaging effects of occupational
labor.[^48] Only leisure activities are truly free of the constraints of
work.

The superiority of leisure over production is evident, says Aristotle,
even in the history of technology. The inventors of crafts used in
recreation are more honored, he says, than the inventors of crafts used
in production, because what is freely chosen is superior to necessity.
On this view, then, inventing techniques for the enjoyment of free time
is better than inventing productive technologies: the Xbox is better
than the MacBook.

**The Reflective Practitioner**

Aristotle distinguishes two stages or aspects of production: first we
conceive a task (*noiēsis*) and then we execute it (*poiēsis*).[^49] The
unity of thought and action is what distinguishes human production from
the activities of other animals. Birds might be better architects, and
beavers might be better engineers, but only humans erect their projects
in thought before executing them in practice. At the same time, human
beings are the only animals who can separate conception from execution
by delegating the productive work to another person. No bird ever
enlisted another bird to build her nest.

Aristotle is aware, of course, that humans often separate conception
from execution. The master builder conceives while the manual laborer
executes; or the master conceives while the slave executes.[^50] This
pervasive separation of conception and execution helps to explain why
Plato and Aristotle praise craftsmanship but denigrate craftsmen: they
praise the knowledge of the master-builder but despise the drudgery of
the wage-slave.

When people condemn modern industry for degrading work into monotonous
routines, what they attack is not specialization but the separation of
conception from execution. What makes jobs meaningless, dull,
repetitive, and oppressive is that the person doing them had no role in
designing the task. Workers are reduced to hired 'hands,' though we must
not confuse the separation of conception from execution with the
separation of mind from hand. Purely mental work can also be divided
between managers who conceive and workers who execute, as when lawyers
task paralegals with research projects.

Work has dignity only to the extent that workers share in both the
conception and execution of their tasks.[^51] Aristotle concedes that if
manual labor involved a love of skill and learning, it could become an
activity worthy of a freeman.[^52] The challenge Plato and Aristotle
pose to us is how to structure ordinary work so that it offers
opportunities for liberal learning: that is, how to educate people to
become reflective practitioners.[^53] Only then will work become worthy
of workers, and the dance inseparable from the dancer.

[^1]: In the poem "Among School Children," *ad finem*.

[^2]: On philosophers as craftsmen of the virtues, see *Republic* 500d.
    On ruling as the royal craft (*technē basilikē*), see *Statesman*
    259b. On a ruler as a craftsman (*dēmiourgos*), see *Republic* 395c,
    500d. On ruling as a *technē*, see *Republic* 488e. For an argument
    that ruling both is and is not a craft in Plato, see Michael B.
    Foster, *The Political Philosophies of Plato and Hegel* (Oxford:
    Clarendon Press, 1935).

[^3]: On Plato and Aristotle in histories of economic thought, see
    M.L.W. Laistner, *Greek Economics* (London: Dent, 1923); Joseph
    Schumpeter, *History of Economic Analysis* (New York: Oxford
    University Press, 1954); Karl Pribram, *A History of Economic
    Reasoning* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983). On
    Plato's economics, see Michael B. Foster, *The Political
    Philosophies of Plato and Hegel* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968);
    Gabriel Danzig et al. eds, *Plato and Xenophon: Comparative Studies*
    (Boston: Brill, 2018); Karl Popper and E.H. Gombrich, *The Open
    Society and Its Enemies* (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
    2020). On Aristotle's economics, see Scott Meikle, *Aristotle's
    Economic Thought* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995); Ricardo
    F. Crespo, *A Re-Assessment of Aristotle's Economic Thought* (New
    York: Routledge, 2013).

[^4]: On crafts in Plato, see R.G. Collingwood, "Plato's Philosophy of
    Art," *Mind* 34 (134) 1925: 154-172; Christopher Janaway, "Arts and
    Crafts in Plato and Collingwood," *The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
    Criticism* 50 (1) 1992: 45-54. On the dignity and degradation of
    work in Plato and Aristotle, see my *The Moral Economy of Labor:
    Aristotelian Themes in Economic Theory* (New Haven: Yale University
    Press, 1993).

[^5]: Plato often uses the terms *technē* and *epistēmē*
    interchangeably: craftsmanship is a form of knowledge, see
    *Statesman* 259e--260a; *Laws* 890d and 892b; *Protagoras* 357b;
    *Phaedrus* 260e; *Gorgias* 500e--501b. On *epistēmē* *basilikē*, see
    *Statesman* 292b, 292e -- 293a and 295b.

[^6]: On how a true craftsman must look to the forms, see *Republic*
    596b--597b; cf. *Gorgias* 503e--504a.

[^7]: On craft as scientific knowledge, see Plato, *Republic*, 340d-e;
    Aristotle, NE 1139b 15; *Metaphysics* 981a 15 to 981b 9.

[^8]: *Republic* 596-597.

[^9]: *Metaphysics* 981a 24-26.

[^10]: *Metaphysics* 981b 8.

[^11]: *Apology* 22d-e.

[^12]: *Apology* 22b; cf. *Ion* 533-534.

[^13]: See Collingwood, *The Principles of Art* (Oxford: Clarendon
    Press, 1938), 15-41.

[^14]: "No other craft seeks its own advantage . . . but the advantage
    of that of which it is the craft" (*Republic* 342c-e); cf.
    *Statesman* 296e--297b. On how crafts secure genuine human goods,
    see *Gorgias* 464b -- 466b.

[^15]: On teaching as a *technē*, see *Republic* 518d.

[^16]: On judging whether to treat an illness, see *Republic* 407a-e;
    cf. *Laches* 195c-d.

[^17]: *Gorgias* 462-463.

[^18]: *Laws* 938a.

[^19]: Here I draw on Collingwood's classic analysis of craft in *The
    Principles of Art*, 15-16.

[^20]: Yet, in *Lesser Hippias*, Plato seems to argue that a craft can
    be used for good or ill (367a-e). In *Republic*, Plato distinguishes
    the person from the craftsman: *qua* craftsman, the shepherd cares
    only for her sheep, but *qua* person (e.g., money-maker) the
    shepherd might care for herself alone (345b-e). A person might use a
    craft for good or ill, but a craftsman uses her craft only for the
    good of those served by the craft.

[^21]: *Nicomachean Ethics* 1139b 16-18.

[^22]: *Nicomachean Ethics,* 1140b 22.

[^23]: *Metaphysics* 1046b 7.

[^24]: *Republic* 343b.

[^25]: *Republic* 345c*.*

[^26]: *Republic* 346e.

[^27]: *Republic* 347a-b.

[^28]: Plato, *Republic* 495d. All citations of Plato are from *Plato:
    Complete Works*, ed. John M. Cooper (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett
    Publishing, 1997).

[^29]: See Plato, *Laws* 741d-e, 743c-d.

[^30]: Plato, *Laws* 806e -- 807e.

[^31]: Plato, *Laws* 846d-e and 919d.

[^32]: See Aristotle, *Politics* 1337b 10-14. All citations of Aristotle
    are from *The Complete Works of Aristotle*, ed. Jonathan Barnes
    (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984).

[^33]: Aristotle, *Politics*, Book 7, chap. 9.

[^34]: Aristotle, *Politics*, Book 6, chap. 4.

[^35]: Aristotle, *Politics* 1278a 1-5. Aristotle also includes farmers
    as mere "conditions" of the polis, at *Politics* 1329a 35-36.
    Aristotle excludes farmers and artisans from the priesthood, at
    *Politics* 1329a 27-28. He says that the best kinds of states would
    not admit artisans as citizens, at *Politics* 1278a 8; cf. 1328b
    38-40.

[^36]: *Republic* 413e -- 414a.

[^37]: *Republic* 415b-c.

[^38]: *Republic* 370c.

[^39]: *Republic* 434a.

[^40]: *Republic* 434a-c.

[^41]: *Nicomachean Ethics* 1094a 5.

[^42]: For this scheme, see *Nicomachean Ethics* 1178b 20; 1140a 1;
    *Topics* 145a 15; *Metaphysics* 1025b 25; 1064a 16.

[^43]: *Metaphysics* 1045b19.

[^44]: On the *ergon* or work of man, see *Nicomachean Ethics* 1097b
    25-32 and 1098a 7.

[^45]: *Nicomachean Ethics* 1098a 15.

[^46]: See *Politics* 1252a 31-34, 1334a 20-24, 1337b 38, 1338b 9-14,
    1339a 7-11, 1339b 16-17.

[^47]: *Politics* 1337b 10-15.

[^48]: *Politics* 1337b 36-42.

[^49]: "Of productions and movements one part is called thinking and the
    other making" (*Metaphysics* 1032b 15).

[^50]: *Metaphysics* 981a 30-31; *Politics* 1254a 5.

[^51]: For a book-length argument to this effect, see my *The Moral
    Economy of Labor: Aristotelian Themes in Economic Theory*.

[^52]: Aristotle, *Politics* 1337b 15-20.

[^53]: On the ideal of the "reflective practitioner," see Donald A.
    Schön, *The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in
    Action* (New York: Basic Books, 1983).
